In today’s information-rich world, there is no reason why going back to college should be the primary way you acquire the knowledge and skills you need to rise up the ranks in your field or to switch careers.
Higher education is important and plenty of research proves that college degrees are worth their cost. However, I also value autonomy and believe that people should be allowed to live in the way that best aligns with their lifestyle preferences and values. For most people, working full-time while in school and likely accruing debt, takes away their freedom to live life to their fullest.
Here are seven strategies that will help you improve your reputation and be offered new opportunities at work, without getting another degree.
#1 Shine Beyond Your Workplace
Attending industry conferences on your own time is a great way to differentiate yourself because they facilitate an experience to help you acquire connections and knowledge that individuals who don’t attend the conference don’t have access to.
When determining which ones to attend, keep in mind that in most cases, you don’t go to conferences for the content. You go for the connections. The information you hear can be learned elsewhere; what you are paying for is the opportunity to be surrounded by talented, intelligent people with similar interests as you. Choose the conferences that focus most on the areas you’re passionate about to make connections with people who are most able to help you succeed.
Before attending conferences, set up a system to measure its return on investment. Here are some examples of measurable goals for conferences:
Agree to future meetings with three people who you can mutually benefit from sharing expertises with.
Connect with two potential clients for your company.
Find a freelancer and/or consultant who may be able to meet a critical need for your company.
For the introverts reading this, I know conferences can be your worst nightmare. However, there is one networking strategy that is guaranteed to make socializing at conferences enjoyable.
Rather than trying to meet lots of people and remaining towards the center of crowds, focus on developing one-on-one connections. Engaging in deep conversations with people boosts your levels of acetylcholine, a neurotransmitter that is linked to feelings of pleasure and contentment in introverts. This will help you maintain your positive attitude.
The challenge for many introverts is finding those few people to engage in deep conversation with. Here are a few things to look for:
People hovering just outside groups, along walls or sitting alone. Chances are, they are other introverts who feel uncomfortable in the large group setting.
Strike up conversations with people sitting around you during presentations to see if you click well.
People whom you have seen or met elsewhere since that sets the foundation for you to strike up a conversation.
If by the end of the conference you only spoke with three or four people, it’s okay as long as you developed strong connections with those individuals and reached your goals.
Action step: Upon returning from conferences, share what you learned and accomplished with your colleagues and supervisors at work to begin putting into action the knowledge learned.
#2 Focus on Your Potential, Not Your Past
When most people try to get a new opportunity, they strive to convince people in power that they are the most qualified person for it. This strategy is intuitive because western society, particularly America, is built on the belief that the people who are the most competent and work the hardest deserve to be the most successful.
Strangely though, our brains do not rationalize who is deserving of opportunity in that way. A joint study between Stanford and Harvard Universities found that people view individuals who have a lot of potential as more competent and worthy of recognition, rewards and promotion than those who have lots of relevant skills and experience.
The researchers found that we like people with potential because they excite us. We envision the amazing things that they may accomplish and we become so enamored by the possibilities that we want to give them opportunities to make our visions become a reality. Contrastingly, there is nothing cognitively alluring about people who have accomplished a lot of things. Being qualified with no obvious growth potential is boring.
Action step: When speaking to people in power (anytime, but particularly when you are trying to get a new opportunity) focus on sharing your potential by talking about your goals, the people you’re aspiring to become like, the skillset you are working to acquire and other topics that highlight your growth potential.
#3 Your Team Creates Your Success
On the quest to improve your reputation in your organization, earn a promotion, gain recognition or achieve another goal that requires you to be a superstar, you are unlikely to succeed by focusing solely on boosting your own career. 86% of managers report that strong teamwork skills are one of the primary factors considered when deciding who to promote.
An effective way to way to prove you’re are a team player is to practice active listening. Active listening is when you ignore all distractions and focus solely on understanding the message someone is sharing with you. It may sound simple, but people rarely engage in this way. Too often while other people are talking, our own thoughts are rambling away about our problems, to-do lists, eye-catching things in the surrounding area, etc. Even thinking about your response to someone before they have had the chance to finish speaking means that you are not actively listening.
Because active listening is so rare, it will help you stand out for two critical reasons:
People you interact with will feel like you genuinely value them which will help you form stronger relationships and strengthen your reputation as someone who is desirable to work with.
When people feel like their thoughts are respected, they share more information. The more information you know about what is going on in your organization, even if it is just gossip, the better equipped you are to identify potential projects and problems you can volunteer to work on and stand out for the contributions you make.
To practice active listening, use a combination of verbal and nonverbal communication to prove to the person you are speaking with that you are 100% engaged with what they have to say.
Some of the key verbal components of active listening are:
Summarizing what people say back at them.
Restating some of their key points.
Giving people feedback tailored to the specific information they shared with you.
The nonverbal components are:
Slowly nodding your head three times. This encourages people to keep talking.
Face your entire body from head to toe toward people. This is called fronting and not only is it a sign of respect, it also shows people that you are fully focused on them.
If sitting especially, lean in toward them and tilt your head slightly sideways. This conveys that you are eager to hear what they have to say.
Organizational psychologist Adam Grant discovered that the majority of people value reciprocation. When you help a colleague, they feel compelled to return the favor to keep your relationship equal. When you’re trying to build yourself up in your organization, having other people support you gives you a huge advantage.
Watch Grant’s Ted Talk to learn more:
Action step: Help others in the workplace whenever you have the time and ability to do so. Whether it is holding the door open for someone carrying a lot of things or volunteering to stay late to help your colleagues with a project or anything in between, helping others will solidify your positive status in the organization.
#4 Don’t Just Be Innovative, Be Intrapreneurial
Being “innovative” is one of those buzzwords that many people label themselves to help them stand out as someone who is creative and capable of solving problems. However, in reality, managers are looking for employees to possess a trait that is similar yet widely different in its application. Research shows that 66% of managers look for intrapreneurial behavior when making promotion decisions.
What is the difference between being innovative and being intrapreneurial?
Innovative people discover creative ways to approach and solve current projects and problems. Comparatively, intrapreneurs identify previously unaddressed areas of potential improvement and propose solutions to address them in a unique way.
In other words, innovative people add their flair to existing projects while intrapreneurs create new projects and solve them too.
Action step: Check out my full article on How to Be an Intrapreneur to find out more.
#5 Think Like a Time Management Guru
Do you look to your manager to set your priorities and arrange your schedule to ensure you have time to complete all of your work or do you do those things independently? Your answer to this question is one of the predominant determining factors in whether or not you’ll be considered for new opportunities.
87% of managers say they look for employees who, when tasked with multiple responsibilities, can independently prioritize their work in ways that best benefit the company. For example, say you’re a product developer and are working on two projects. You need to do a few days of uninterrupted work on project one to make progress before your meeting with your supervisor at the end of the week. However, the supply chain team needs information about project two so that they have time to set up supplier contracts for that product. A strategic employee would gather the information for the supply chain team prior to dedicating the rest of their time to project one. This ensures both they and the supply chain team are able to meet deadlines.
To develop this skill, you must be able to independently answer these questions:
What tasks should you prioritize?
How do you plan your schedule to ensure all of your work is completed in a timely manner that aligns with your priorities?
One way to do this is to rank all of your tasks based on how urgent and important your tasks are.
Urgent tasks have a deadline coming up soon.
Important tasks are critical to your project’s success and may be highly critiqued.
After making this chart, complete your tasks in the following order:
Important and urgent
Not important and urgent
Important and not urgent
Not important and not urgent
The more successfully independent you become, the less your discussions with your managers will focus on the logistics of keeping you on track. This opens up more time to discuss valuable topics such as your strengths, goals and areas of improvement.
Action step: Use the above framework to categorize your next 10 tasks. This makes it easy to determine how to most effectively prioritize your time.
#6 Invest in Alternative Education
If you’ve hit a point where your skills are stagnating and you are struggling to keep up with recent graduates or you want to make a career change but first need knowledge in your new field, it can feel like going back to school is your only option.
Luckily, there are several organizations who have worked to transform higher education by creating an open education model that gives anyone the opportunity to take courses with little to no commitment.
There are two primary types of open education: expert-led and university-led.
University-led open education courses are similar to traditional online university courses except they tend to be shorter, are open enrollment to anyone in the world and require far less work.
Two of the most popular platforms are EdX and Coursera. Both offer a range of options from allowing you to audit courses for free and complete zero coursework to low-cost certificate programs that require some homework and quizzes to mini degree programs.
Expert-led courses are online courses created by industry experts who want to share their knowledge with the world. Their length, style and structure varies widely depending on the instructor. These courses offer immense value because they tend to be highly practical, however the lack of oversight means that most are unable to offer credible certificates. Popular platforms include: Udemy, LinkedIn Learning and CreativeLive.
If you are uncertain about whether or not you’ll be able to learn as well using open education as you would in a college setting, consider this: 85% of students who use open education materials say they learn just as well if not better than those who learn using standard textbooks in a classroom environment.
Other benefits of open education include:
There is little to no long-term commitment so you don’t have to make major life sacrifices to learn.
Allows you to join a community of professionals who are also interested in learning.
Online courses include learners from all around the world and in the forums, you have the opportunity to make connections with and learn from people whom you would never meet in-person.
Keep in mind that traditional education isn’t the only way to acquire the knowledge you need to stand out in the workplace.
#7 This is the Hobby that Nearly All Successful People Share
If you look at high-performers from a variety of industries, there are very few characteristics that most share in common since the traits necessary for success vary widely by profession.
One of the few success strategies that does transcend industries is reading. A study surveyed 1,200 wealthy people (those who earn $160,000+ per year) and discovered that the one thing they had in common was that they all read in their freetime. More important though is what they read. Unlike low-income individuals (those with an annual income of $35,000 or less) who read novels, magazines and other light-hearted publications for entertainment, wealthy people read educational nonfiction to learn.
Being well-read and committed to a lifelong pursuit of knowledge makes you stand out because it ensures that you are always one of the most intelligent people in the room. It also gives you the perspective to add fascinating contributions to conversations and approach your work in more effective ways using the lessons you acquired through reading.
By reading this article, you’re already off to a good start. However, books provide a level of depth into subjects that few articles can match. If you don’t know where to begin, start with bestsellers in your industry or chose one from our list:
If you think you don’t have enough time to read regularly, estimate the amount of time you spend each week on social media and Netflix. The majority of that time can be spent more productively with a book or some research-backed articles.

The formula for fascinating conversation
What to do to increase your impact and income using people skills
Our strategy for hacking the people code–we call it the matrix (Keanu Reeves not included with each book sale)
The art and science of understanding people
Learn the new–science based way for winning friends and influencing people.Are you ready for a science challenge?
In the video below, I am going to clap out a few songs for you and I want you to guess the songs I’m clapping. Ready? Let’s play:
Most people think they can do very well on this challenge, but in actuality, they don’t do so great. Why? This is the perfect example of how we overestimate our abilities, especially when it comes to decoding people and settings. I share this challenge with you as a nice reminder to stay humble and stick to the basics.
Why You’re Not as Above Average as You Think You Are
It’s not just musical recognition and intelligence that individuals are overconfident about. People, primarily in Western cultures, tend to overestimate their abilities in most areas. Here are three of the most common ways people think too highly of themselves.
#1 We consistently think we are more generous and selfless than we actually are
In one experiment, 84% of participants said they would cooperate with their assigned partners to yield an equal outcome for both of them. However, in the experiment, only 61% cooperated while the remainder chose to act in their own self-interest. In real life this comes up often when people have the opportunity to help others, and consider themselves the type of kind, generous person who would, and yet they don’t offer any assistance because it is not convenient for them.
#2 We have a survivorship bias
Survivorship bias causes us to focus on our successes and ignore our failures. This contributes to our overconfidence because we rarely take time to acknowledge our mistakes. Instead, our brain reminiscences in memories where we thrived because that’s what feels good to focus on.
#3 We think that our interpretation of the world is correct
Because of this, even when we fail, it is easy to blame the failure on someone else for not being able to appreciate how great our work is. Likewise, in arguments, we have a tendency to believe that our logic is solid, and though we think we can understand the other person’s perspective, we believe they are wrong because they are unable to understand our perspective. If they were able to accurately interpret our perspective, they would see that we are right. The other person is thinking the same thing which is why it can sometimes seem impossible to resolve conflicts.
The Competence Paradox
What’s interesting is that the least competent people are most likely to rate their abilities higher than they actually are while the most competent individuals are the most likely to underrate their abilities. Researchers don’t have a definite reason for why this happens, but possibilities include that individuals who are highly competent tend to be in demanding roles where there is constant pressure to keep improving and because many things are easy for them, they assume they are easy for everyone else too, making them think that they are average.
Another factor that prevents overconfidence is when people are forced to acknowledge their failures due to unwanted results. A study in the Journal of Consumer Research found that people tend to be overconfident before they do something, but their confidence quickly drops if they didn’t do as well as expected on their first try. If there is an opportunity for a second go, most people greatly underestimate how well they will do.
This occurs because being forced to confront failure eliminates one of the biggest sources of overconfidence: ignorance. Everyone doesn’t think they are better than average because they are egotistical by nature. Rather, many people believe they have superior abilities because that is what they are told. Most people are overly positive when giving direct feedback because they don’t want to offend the other person.
Though well-intended, exaggerated feedback gives people a false sense of abilities and hurts them later on.

The formula for fascinating conversation
How to walk into a room full of strangers and make a killer first impression
What to do to increase your impact and income using people skills
Our strategy for hacking the people code–we call it the matrix (Keanu Reeves not included with each book sale)
The art and science of understanding people
Learn the new–science based way for winning friends and influencing people.Do you fantasize about becoming an entrepreneur but love the company you’re working for and would hate to leave it? You don’t have to start your own business to have an entrepreneurial career. Instead, become an intrapreneur.
The term “intrapreneurship” was first coined by the business authors Gifford and Elizabeth Pinchot in the late 1970s to describe employees in large, highly structured corporations who defied the norm by acting creatively and autonomously despite the hierarchical environments they existed within.
Intrapreneurs are individuals who are dedicated to their companies but also have the fiery passion and creativity of entrepreneurs. They desire to bring revolutionary ideas to life and yield higher returns for their companies, but want and usually obtain, the freedom to do so without passing through all of the processes that exist within large companies.
If this sounds you, you may be the perfect fit to become an intrapreneur.
How to Become an Intrapreneur
If you’re interested in becoming an intrapreneur, the first step is to look into your company’s policies regarding working on personal projects during work hours. Many innovation-driven companies allow their employees to spend a certain percentage of their time on projects of their choosing and if that’s the case for you, you know that you have time available at work to come up with your intrapreneurship idea. Managers at companies with a personal project policy also tend to like to hear about how you’re spending that time, so it’s easy to start a conversation about your intrapreneurial ideas.
Companies like Shutterstock hold annual hackathons where, for a short period of time, they give their employees unlimited freedom to experiment with any ideas they are interested in and pitch them to management. If company leaders like the idea, they will officially pursue the project and give the intrapreneur the freedom and resources to bring their idea to life.
While becoming an intrapreneur is easiest in companies that have policies in place that support intrapreneurship, you can still become an intrapreneur if it is something the company you work for is not accustomed to allowing. The key is to identify a problem or potential area of improvement within your company and create an innovative solution for it. You may only have one chance to convince your superiors to adopt it so, like an entrepreneur pitching to a venture capitalist, you need to thoroughly do your research and be prepared to prove your idea will yield a return on your company’s investment before you pitch it to decision-makers.
Once you know what your capabilities are, you can brainstorm what type of intrapreneur you want to become. Ask yourself these questions to get started:
Is there a new product idea that you think would be a great addition to your company’s offerings?
Do you know how to make a current product or initiative like an email marketing campaign more successful?
Does your company have a long-standing problem or inefficiency that you can develop a solution for?
The question(s) you said yes to will help you narrow down the scope of your intrapreneurial endeavors so you have a clear idea of your purpose and can convey that to others.
How to Pitch Your Intrapreneurship Idea
If you work for a company that embraces intrapreneurship, speak to your supervisor and colleagues to learn how your company decides what intrapreneurship projects get approved and follow the existing process.
However, if your company does not regularly support intrapreneurship ventures, you need to convince your superiors why your project idea should be approved. Here’s how:
#1 Define why your project matters
How does your idea contribute to your company’s overall mission? Strive to create a personal connection between the company and your project. It is impossible for us to make decisions without using the part of our brain that controls emotions, so to be persuasive and influential you must first explain why your idea matters before jumping into its specifications.
Watch Simon Sinek’s TED talk to learn the power of starting with why.
#2 Gather data and prove that your idea supports your company’s bottom-line
If you’re working for a company who does not regularly support creative, employee-pitched projects, you need to show them that the risk they take on you being allowed to pursue your project with a lot of autonomy will yield a positive return for the company.
If you don’t already have them, making friends with people in your company’s finance department is a great way to learn the style and structure of your company’s financial report so you know how to present your evidence to them in a compelling way.
#3 Explain the plan
When your superiors first hear your idea, they may be skeptical about its viability and whether or not you are capable of delivering on your promises. Have a detailed implementation plan that includes estimated dates for milestone completions and benchmarks.
This will help relieve their concerns about how it is going to be done and will reassure decision-makers that they are going to invest in an idea that has a structure, timeline and method for measuring growth and success.
Want more? Join the Science of People Monthly Insights for the latest human behavior hacks:Why do certain actors rub us wrong while other celebs steal our love? Hating Anne Hathaway has become a national pastime. But no one can get enough of Jennifer Lawrence. Ben Affleck was selected as one of the most hated celebrities of 2016, while John Krasinski’s goofy smile and hilarious pranks make us swoon.
There is a simple reason why we hate Anne Hathaway and love Jennifer Lawrence. And it has to do with science.
The Science:
Humans are incredibly adept at picking up social cues – especially nonverbally. In my book Captivate, I show how researchers from Tufts University found that we judge people within .05 seconds of seeing their profile picture. And there is usually one big question we are trying to answer in that first impression: Are you an ally or an enemy?
Here at the Science of People, we study the hidden forces that drive our behavior. We take the latest academic research and turn them into citizen science experiments to see how the science works in real life. For example, Princeton University Researcher, Dr. Alexander Todorov found that different images of the same person can create drastically different first impressions.
The Problem:
We often don’t know what signals we are sending. Anne Hathaway most likely has no idea that she is accidentally sending off negative cues in her most of her social profiles. Are you?
Without realizing we might be hurting or helping our online brand. How do you know what signals your profile picture is sending? Let’s compare Anne Hathaway and Ben Affleck to Jennifer Lawrence and John Krasinski to find out. And to make sure you are not accidentally making the same mistakes.
Anne Hathaway vs. Jennifer Lawrence
Take a look at Anne Hathaway and Jennifer Lawrence’s IMDB and Twitter photos. Seem similar? Not at all. From a body language perspective they could not be more different! At a minimum 60% of our communication is nonverbal. Subtle nonverbal signals send very strong messages, which affect our perception. See if you can guess the nonverbal cues:
#1 Which picture is the most attractive?
From a nonverbal perspective there is a clear winner here:
In this photo, Jennifer Lawrence is engaging in a few very attractive nonverbal gestures.
She is pointing at her lips, which makes us want to pay attention to them.
She has her chin angled down and is looking up at us through her lashes. This is the universal look of seduction. Researchers from the University of Brussels found that when we view someone from above we see them as younger and more submissive. Farhod P. Karimov and his team has participants look at different photos on websites. They found that ‘trust-signalling’ was an important social cue that is sent nonverbally.
#2 Which picture is the most confident?
Jennifer Lawrence exudes confidence, and we love to be around, to look at and to adore confident people.
She is in the universal pride pose. Researchers at the University of British Columbia found that athletes across cultures stand broadly when they win a race and shrink down in defeat. When we look at someone’s photo we are trying to decide if they look more like a winner or loser–are they standing broadly and taking up space or are they contracting their body?
Her wide smile and outward look signal optimism and forward thinking. A genuine happiness microexpression is universal. Dr. Paul Ekman found that across cultures, when we are happy we smile and that smile reaches all the way up into our eyes. We do this to signal friendship — a smile is the only facial expression that can be seen from 200 feet away!
#3 Which woman would you want to be friends with?
You guessed it, Jennifer Lawrence also looks the friendliest. This time it’s in comparison. Take a look at Anne Hathaway’s photos:
She sends off signals we do not like.
Notice how Anne Hathaway’s IMDB picture is similar to Jennifer Lawrence—both are smiling and showing bare shoulders, but could not be more different. Why? Research has found that the angle of our face makes a huge difference for someone’s perception of us. We noticed that this had a significant difference on profile first impressions. We analyzed over 400 photos from the website HotorNot.com. We found that when people angled their chin up in the photos, they had lower ratings. I believe this is because we do not like when someone angles their chin up at us — it makes us feel dismissed or belittled.
Anne Hathaway’s Twitter Profile picture shows a bit of fear – wide eyes, lack of eye contact and a blocking behavior. Blocking is when someone places a barrier in front of themselves as if to block off connection. In our Hot or Not Study we found that the photos of people looking off into the distance or angling the body away from the camera had the lowest scores.
Check Yourself!
Anne Hathaway likely has no idea that her choice of photos are affecting her likeability. Be sure you don’t make the same mistake!
Use a broad stance – It’s better to look like a winner. Take up space in your photo, put your hands on your hips, drape an arm on a chair and show that you feel confident.
Make eye contact with the camera if possible – Try to make eye contact with the person who will see your picture by looking straight into the camera.
If you want to be extra sultry look up through your lashes – This is a very flirtatious look, but if it feels good on you, then rock it!
Ben Affleck vs. John Krasinski
Let’s take a look at Ben Affleck and John Krasinski’s IMDB and Twitter pictures:
#1 Who looks more positive?
Right off the bat we notice a huge difference in facial expressions between Ben Affleck and John Krasinski’s photo:
What does this tell us?
John Krasinski has a big smile—which according to Dr. Barbara Wild we find contagious. Dr. Wild and her research team showed people pictures of happy or sad faces. Then they gave them a series of mood tests. They found they could ‘infect’ participants with the emotions in each image. When people viewed a happy face, people felt happier. After viewing a sad face, people felt negative. They only flashed each image for 500ms and participants still caught the emotion.
Ben Affleck is showing the facial expression for contempt. In my book Captivate, we review the 7 universal microexpressions and contempt is the most negative one. It is a simple one-sided mouth raise:
We like to be around positive people, and avoid negative ones. Dr. Michael Yapko has found that we are attracted to people with positive emotions because we catch the emotions of the people we are around. If we see a negative picture, we are less attracted to them because we worry about catching that negativity.
#2 Who would you want to hang out with?
Which guy would you want to come to your party?
The difference here is subtle but important.
Krasinski is bowing down—it shows humility and congeniality. We love this kind of photo. He is also smiling and has his arm out, still showing confidence.
Again, Affleck is not smiling. And worse he is far away, this makes him feel emotionally distant as well. Having someone in front of him in the picture is also a kind of blocking (remember Anne Hathaway?).
Check Yourself!
Don’t fall into the same accidental traps of Ben Affleck. Try to incorporate the tips into your photos:
Smile – Don’t give a partial smile or a smirk, show positivity with an authentic smile.
Don’t block – Try not to have anything in front of your body. The more open you can be towards the camera, the more open you look.
Be in a broad stance – Look more like a winner! Take up space, stand broadly and show pride in your picture by not shrinking down.
Don’t show contempt – Avoid that one sided mouth raise.

The formula for fascinating conversation
How to walk into a room full of strangers and make a killer first impression
Our strategy for hacking the people code–we call it the matrix (Keanu Reeves not included with each book sale)
The art and science of understanding people
Learn the new–science based way for winning friends and influencing people.Is it better to be loved or feared?
We asked our Twitter followers this question. 89% of our followers said it was better to be loved than feared. Only 11% said it is better to be feared. Find out what the science has to say in this video.
Researchers Joseph Folkman and Jack Zenger studied 51,836 leaders to discover how significant of a role likability plays in the success of leaders. They found that only 27 leaders who were ranked in the bottom 25% of likability also ranked in the top 25% for leadership effectiveness. That means there is only approximately a 1 in 2000 chance that a leader can be unlikable and successful.
Why does likability matter so much?
Likable leaders earn the trust of their team members and treat them well. Researchers discovered that when people feel respected by their leaders and are comfortable with them, they perform better on teams.
Teams with likable leaders also tend to be more stable in the long-run because of lower turnover rates. A Gallup survey found that almost 50% of people have quit jobs to escape bad bosses. This suggests that one of the reasons unlikable leaders fail to produce positive results is that they can’t hold onto their top performing team members.
Even if they can hold on to their top performers, unlikable leaders are almost always incapable of leading teams through changes whether that’s introducing a new project, changing a process, or going through a company restructuring. For organizational change to be implemented effectively, people have to voluntarily change; if a leader forces them to do so, most people won’t work efficiently because they are unwilling to adopt the changes. It takes a likable leader who has earned the trust of their teams to convince people to willingly step out of their comfort zones and do something a new way.
Don’t Underestimate the Power of Competence
However, competence is also important. An organizational psychologist Erlangen-Nuremberg asked people to choose between two training programs. One focused on competence related skills – more in the realm of being feared. The other focused on warmth-related skills – more in the realm of being loved. Most participants chose the competence-based training for themselves but the warmth-based training for other people. In other words, this is a nuanced issue. Here’s how I break it down:
To be loved you value being:
Liked
A good team player
Admired/popular
Leaders who prefer to be loved are people-oriented and specialize at fostering strong bonds on their teams.
To be feared you value being:
Respected
Powerful
Seen as important
Leaders who prefer to be feared are goal-oriented and value orderliness and obedience.
Both are good and both are also bad. If you are loved, you’re not always taken seriously. If you are feared, you’re not always liked. Here’s the thing, I believe there is a way to get both. I call this the science of charisma. It is the balance between being both warm and competent, both liked and respected. I have a twelve step method for teaching this skill to you.In school you may have been told that there is no such thing as a dumb question. I hate to break it to you, but you were lied to.
As much as I believe education is important and a great tool to help you become more successful, it offers students a serious disservice in the area of social skills. Reality is, there are stupid questions that lower people’s impression of you when you ask them. I know the people who ask them mean well and are wonderful people and I love them. But, please do yourself and the people around you a favor and never ask these five questions.
5 Stupid Questions
#1 Can I pick your brain?
No! I’m not even kidding you, I have a gmail filter set up to spam any email that contains that phrase. Why? It’s a lazy question. If you ask this of busy people it shows you just want free advice without having to do any of the prep work. I love mentoring people and giving advice, but it has to have a purpose and when people ask to pick my brain, I know they are just energy vampires wanting to soak up all the goodness in the room for their own benefit. If you want to do an informational interview with someone or learn more about what they do, ask a specific question and set an agenda.
#2 Anything you can Google
“Do you know how to get to the Starbucks on Burnside?” Let me Google that for you. “Do you know what year that movie came out?” Let me Google that for you. “Do you know if rice cakes are gluten free?” Let me Google that for you. Don’t be lazy. If you have a question that Google might be able to answer, Google it first, then Google it again, then look further than the first page of the Google results. If you still don’t find anything, then you can ask someone, but be sure to mention that you already Googled it and couldn’t find the answer.
#3 Can you be my mentor?
Having a mentor can be a tremendous help to your career and I know that you have good intentions if you ask this question. You probably have a business crush on someone and you desperately want to learn from them, but asking someone if you can be their mentee is not the way to do it. Mentors should ask if you want to be mentored. Why? Mentorship is serious business. I treat the few people I mentor with incredible importance. It’s not something I throw around willy-nilly. If you get a mentor who gives you a quick yes, they might not be taking it as seriously as you want them too. Instead of asking someone to be your mentor, show them why you are deserving of being their mentee. Ask them really specific questions looking for targeted advice then take the advice and follow-up to show that you are taking them seriously. You don’t need a formal mentorship to learn from someone so never ask “Will you be my mentor?” The right mentors will ask and seek you.
#4 Something that is on their website or Wikipedia
If you are going into a job interview and you ask something that you could easily find on their company web page or Wikipedia, it makes you look unprepared and it creates a useless waste of energy for the person who has to answer. If you go on a date and ask something in their online dating profile, it makes you look like you didn’t even care enough to read it before the date. So, do your research and never ask anything that is on their website, profile, or Wikipedia.
#5 Any of the following stupid questions people ask on the Internet
I couldn’t pick a last question so I thought I’d include these stupid questions people have asked Google:
And a few others:
How do you lose weight without moving?
I was bitten by a turtle when I was a young lad. Should I still drink orange juice?
Do you think NASA invented thunder to cover up the sound of space battles?
Do you guys think that if Michael Jackson hadn’t died he would still be alive today?
You want to know the single answer to all of these questions? It’s just no. No. There are no answers to these non-questions.
Want more social hacks? Sign up for our free newsletter:As a professional–entrepreneur, intrapreneur or aspiring, how often do you develop goals surrounding your career? How often do you use active energy to think about how you want to evolve and grow professionally?
It’s easy to get swept into the day-to-day of our work, but it’s essential to exercise our planning and growth mindset on a regular basis to stay on track, to move forward and most important, to make change when it’s needed.
There’s a serious crisis in organizations when it comes to strategy and goal-oriented thinking. According to OnStrategy:
95% of a typical workforce doesn’t understand its organization’s strategy
90% of organizations fail to execute their strategies successfully
86% of executive teams spend less than one hour per month discussing strategy
60% of organizations don’t link strategy to budgeting
Addressing strategy and following plans is a crucial element of both a business’s and professional’s success. For this, I’ve created the:
Career Development Plan
We’ve heard these questions before:
Where do you want to be in 1 year?
Where do you want to be in 5 years?
What are your goals?
Your answers to these questions don’t mean anything unless you have a corresponding plan in place to help propel you to get to the professional level you’re dreaming of.
Let’s turn dreams into reality.
We have to cultivate your people skills and technical resources so you can hit your goals, and I will show you how. When you examine your career development plan, you’re able to identify opportunities to leverage the people and resources around you. This is fundamental for a successful day, month and year. And the first lesson of People School. People School is an intensive online training to help you increase your influence, powerfully communicate, and command your relationships.
People School is a 12-step video-based training program designed to increase your interpersonal intelligence. Our comprehensive curriculum will equip you or your team with 12 advanced, science-backed people skills to level up your career.
To be first in line for the next People School class please join the waitlist below.
Our next class will be November 4th & 5th.We chatted with Southwest Magazine this month on the secrets to making better connections. Check it out:
Behavioral expert Vanessa Van Edwards reveals the secrets to making better connections.
What’s the best way to work a room at a networking event?
“The space can be divided into zones. Most people think they should stand at the start zone near the entrance because they’ll be a ‘welcomer,’ but that’s a mistake. We need to get our bearings before we start socializing. The best zone is near the bar. After getting a drink, there’s a moment of panic when people turn to face the room and are looking for someone to talk to. If you’re nearby and can causally strike up a conversation, then you’re a social savior.”
Check out more of our media features here!In the modern workplace, there’s a palpable buzz of productivity, projects and people. How often, however, do you stop to think about how your individual workflow is affected by the people around you?
Our unique workflows and our to-do lists are actually not all our own. Every task assigned and every project delegation usually involves others in the grand picture of a team or company. For example, you may have “Design Logo” as a task on your to-do list. In addition to your individual work on the task, this task also includes getting graphics from Sue, asking for mockups from Robert and finally sending edits to your manager.
Most of our day-to-day follows this breakdown:
People: The people who help or hinder you getting your work done
Touch points: Every time you interact with another person during the day or week
Workflow: How people change your workflow and to do lists
When you examine your people workflow, you’re able to identify people, touch points and workflow inefficiencies. This is fundamental for a successful day. And the first lesson of People School. People School is an intensive online training to help you increase your influence, powerfully communicate, and command your relationships.
People School is a 12-step video-based training program designed to increase your interpersonal intelligence. Our comprehensive curriculum will equip you or your team with 12 advanced, science-backed people skills to level up your career.
People School is not your average soft skills training.
To be first in line for the next People School class please join the waitlist below.
Our next class will be November 4th & 5th.When preparing for public speaking events, most people carefully plan out what they’re going to say, wear, what presentation aids they’re going to use and even what body language they are going to display. The one thing that people often forget to take care of is their voice.
Research shows that people decide how trustworthy or dominant you are within seconds of hearing your voice. With judgements being made that fast, you don’t have time to warm up in your presentation.
Whether you’re a rising public speaker trying to improve your reputation and land more events or if you’re striving to become a more influential leader at work, the key to making people listen to and remember what you have to say is mastering your public speaking voice.
Here’s how:
Learn the Sound of Your Own Voice
Once you’ve established the feelings that public speaking evokes in you, you need to learn how those feelings affect your voice. Brian Tracy recommends recording yourself as often as possible – speaking your thoughts aloud, having conversations with friends, giving a presentation at work, etc. so you can hear what your voice sounds like relaxed, having fun, and in stressful situations. You may find that your voice is low and slow when you’re speaking to yourself but with your friends it rises because they increase your energy levels and, when you’re presenting, your normally slow and steady rate suddenly increases. Once you’re aware of how your emotions affect your voice, you can work on the specific areas that need improvement.
After Margaret Thatcher became aware of how her soft voice was leading people to underestimate her as a leader, she listened to herself and made improvements until her public speaking voice was transformed from sweet and gentle to powerful. Check out her before and after voices:
Master Your Breathing
Now that you know what you need to fix, the question is how do you change your voice? According to Toastmasters, the first step in developing a strong public speaking voice is mastering your breathing. Females in particular make the mistake of not breathing deeply enough which causes their voices to sound high and weak. Breathe deeply and at a controlled pace.
Develop a habit of breathing deeply throughout the day so that when it comes time to speak, this is your natural breathing pattern and you’ll have less trouble doing it when your nerves kick in.
Stay Hydrated
Another easy trick to ensure your voice is always “public speaking ready” is to never let your vocal cords dry out. Studies show that your hydration levels have a direct effect on the sound of your voice. The key is to not wait until right before your speech to start drinking. Keep yourself well-hydrated during the hours leading up to your speech so that your voice doesn’t dry out while you’re speaking.
Don’t Give a Speech, Have a Conversation
Public speaking expert Gary Genard says that to establish a connection with your audience, you need to speak as if you were having a conversation with specific members. When you practice, don’t focus solely on all of the things you are supposed to do to be effective. Instead, practice in front of a friend as if you were talking to them. While this approach may not be appropriate in certain professional settings, it is a great way to connect with most audiences.
The better you become at this public speaking approach, the more your audience will warm up to you because you’ll sound more genuine than if you approach your presentations with the mentality of trying to impress your audience.
Stand Ready to Speak
It’s not just your breathing and vocal cords that have a physical effect on your voice. Public speaking coach Kate DeVore says that when public speaking, it is essential that you stand or sit with your back straight. This makes your voice stronger and more clear by allowing you to breathe deeper. It also has the added benefit of making you look more confident.
Optimize Your Speaking Rate
The optimum speaking rate is in the range of 120-160 words per minute. Speaking below that range can cause people to drown you out for being slow and boring while speaking far above it can prompt people to tune you out or get annoyed because they don’t understand what you are saying.
As a fast-talker myself, I know how difficult it can be to lower your speaking rate, especially when you feel anxious and/or excited on stage. Here are two solutions to slow down your speech:
Spend time reading aloud and focus on enunciating every word. This forces you to speak slower and learn where you should be pausing.
Enlist the people around you to stop you every time you are talking fast. Being interrupted and forced to repeat yourself every time you speak quickly gets annoying really fast. By having people point out when you are talking fast, it makes you more aware of your speaking habits and forces you to slow down.
Both of these strategies will help you learn what it feels like to speaking at an optimal rate. On the other hand, if you talk to slowly, focus on reducing your pauses and picking up your rate.

The formula for fascinating conversation
How to walk into a room full of strangers and make a killer first impression
What to do to increase your impact and income using people skills
Our strategy for hacking the people code–we call it the matrix (Keanu Reeves not included with each book sale)
The art and science of understanding people
Learn the new–science based way for winning friends and influencing people.When you first meet someone, do you stare into their eyes?
There’s an old saying, “the eyes are the windows to the soul” — sound familiar? We say, it’s not wrong!
We can tell a lot about someone based on their eye contact, especially hidden emotions.
Do you know how to read someone’s mind in their eyes? Can you tell what a person is feeling just by making eye contact?
If you think you have what it takes to know the hidden meaning behind the eyes, it’s time to put your skills to the test. We love conducting new experiments on human behavior here in our Science of People human behavior research lab, and we want to know how good you are at interpreting emotions, just from the eyes alone.
We have created a little quiz with different people making expressions, but here’s the kicker — we only let you see their eyes! We would love your help and to put your skills to the test, please take the quiz below:
Want even more on the Science of Lie Detection? Check out Lie Detection The Course!
Do you know when someone is lying to you?
We like to think we are great at spotting lies—but on average we can only detect deception with about 54% accuracy. That’s barely better than chance!
I believe learning how to spot deception is a life skill.
We should all know how to have more honest interactions. We should all be able to protect ourselves from liars. We should all be able to decode hidden emotions.
That is what our new course is all about.
I want to teach you how to:
Improve your lie-spotting abilities to up to 90% accuracy
Decode hidden emotions
Increase the honesty of your interactions
Learn the secrets of body languageHere at the Science of People, we think a lot about personality. Not only is personality a fun way to learn about yourself and your friends, it can also make you a more effective team member and leader.
Understanding personality allows you to form stronger relationships with your team and work more efficiently because you know how each person prefers to think, act, and communicate. Armed with that knowledge, you can tailor your interactions with your colleagues to match what makes the most sense for their personality. Check out our video to find out how:
The Building Blocks of Personality
Everyone has five main personality traits.The easiest way to remember them is by the word OCEAN
Openness describes how favorably a person views new ideas, novel experiences, and change.
Conscientiousness determines whether someone is detail-oriented or big-picture minded.
Extroversion is based on whether individuals get their energy from other people or by being alone.
Agreeableness reveals how driven people are to cooperate and be liked by others.
I want to help you identify the personality traits of your colleagues. Get out a piece of paper or open a note-taking app and write out the word OCEAN vertically like it’s listed above. I’m going to explain the high and lows of each trait so you can figure out who on your team fits each.
Openness
We’re going to start with openness. Ask yourself these questions to determine the highest open person on your team You can think about friends and family too but, try to stick with colleagues for this activity:
Who is the most adventurous person?
Who tries the most new ideas?
The person answered these questions is the highest open person you work with.
Someone who is low open prefers tradition and routine. So, think about the person who loves doing things the exact same way. They start their day checking their email and then they work on their main project then they go to lunch then check email again etc. If you made them do the project before the email their brains would explode. Low open people are focused on things staying the same and are change averse. Who fits that description on your team?
Write down the person on your team who is your highest open and the person who is your lowest open.
Highest Open: _____________
Lowest Open: _____________
Conscientiousness
Now let’s get into conscientiousness. Your highest conscientious person is someone who loves to-do lists and routines. They’re highly organized and they always have an agenda. Who is the highest conscientious person you work with?
Your low conscientious colleague is someone who prefers big ideas. To-do lists and things that are detail-oriented are actually going to be overwhelming for them. They talk in vague, big-picture ideas but this isn’t a bad thing. Low conscientious people tend to be great at creating strategies because they’re able to look past all the little details involved in projects and see what needs to be done in the long-term.
Think of your highest and lowest conscientious people on your team.
Highest in Conscientiousness: _____________
Lowest in Conscientiousness: _____________
Extroversion
Next up is extroversion. This is probably the trait that you are most familiar with. The highest extrovert you work with is the person who loves chatting. They stop by your cubicle, they want to go out to lunch, they love planning happy hours. They’re the ones who plan office birthday parties. Many extroverts even have lots of little games and pictures at their desk to capture your attention lure you in for conversations. Bringing treats to share with people at work is another thing they’ll do to engage people in casual conversations. Think about the highest extroverted person you know.
If you have a low extrovert on your team, often called an introvert, they might keep to themselves a little bit more so they might not be as chatty at the office. Depending on how social their job is they also might actually need downtime after work so they might or might not go to the happy hour or office birthday party. If they go, they’ll often only stay for a little bit of time because they have to go home to recharge. If you catch them eating lunch alone, it’s probably not because they’re antisocial or something is wrong; they likely needed few minutes to themselves because that is how they process.
Identify the high extroverts and introverts on your team.
Extroverts: _____________
Introverts: _____________
Agreeableness
Next one is agreeableness. Agreeableness is how you work on a team. The highest agreeable person you work with is the person who says yes a lot, is very empathetic, and loves being a team player. If you say “Hey! Want to do this?” A high agreeable will respond with “Sure, I’ll try it!” Who is the highest agreeable, the most cooperative person you work with?
If you have low agreeable on your team, they’re a little trickier. They are data-driven and highly analytical. They want to see stats, charts, and facts to back up every claim and if you tell them something that you heard on the news or the radio, they’re first instinct is to google it to verify. If you have a low agreeable person, keep in mind that they are going to want written information with lots of data to back it up before they are willing to say yes. Think about the highest and lowest agreeable people on your team.
High in Agreeableness: _____________
Low in Agreeableness: _____________
Neuroticism
The last trait is neuroticism. Neuroticism is how your colleagues worry. Think about if something bad were to happen at the office, maybe a frustrated email from a client comes in or the office has to close early or the copy machine breaks. In scenarios that are problematic but not extremely so your high neurotic person is going to be the most freaked out. They’re going to be like “‘Oh my gosh! What are we going to do? The client is going to drop us and our reputation is going to fall apart. We’re not going to be able to fix it!” They worry the most and they are worried for the longest.
On the contrary, the lowest neuroticism responds to difficulties by saying ‘It’s all going to work out just fine.” Low neurotics aren’t really worried about things happening in the moment or in the future. They can be a good balance for high neurotics because having someone who worries and someone who rarely gets stressed out by problems means that when you work together you can find a balance. Think about the highest and the lowest neurotic person on your team.
High Neurotics: _____________
Low Neurotics: _____________
I think that everyone should play with their colleagues, they’re friends, their co-workers, their families because it helps you honor where people already are. The point of personality science is not to change people to make them more like you but to figure out who they are and what are their natural tendencies so you can truly accept them and honor what makes them unique.
Take our Official Personality Test below:I regret hitting reply all on that email. I regret drinking too much that one night – you know the one I mean. I regret buying that stupid, overly-priced vacation package. I regret my college major. I regret getting that tattoo – just kidding. I stopped myself just in time. Any of those sound familiar?
Ah, regret; it’s a pesky beast. Interestingly, there is some cool science behind it. We asked people in our weekly Twitter poll “Do you have something you did not do in your life that you greatly regret missing out on?” 74% of people said yes,they did regret something they didn’t do. Three quarters of us feel the pain of regret and I know it’s brutal, but what about the science? I turned to the research to find out what we can do to make regret less painful.
Thomas Gilovich is the leading researcher on regret and he did a study called “The Experience of Regret: What, When, Why.” Here’s the bad news:e found that although most of us experience regret, it doesn’t fade over time.
He asked people in his study, “When you look back on your experiences in life, what do you regret more, those things that you did but wish you hadn’t or those things that you didn’t do but wish you had?”
54% were regrets of inaction whereas only 12% of people regretted their actions more. The remaining 34% of people said they most regretted decisions that didn’t fit into either category.
This contributes to something called the Zeigarnik Effect: Regrettable failures to act tend to be more memorable and enduring than regrettable actions. When we regret something that we didn’t do, we have unrealized ambitions and unfulfilled intentions and incomplete goals. In other words, we have wishes that we didn’t get to act upon.
So what can you do to prevent regret? Take action! Here are the top three areas where regret tends to creep in later in life:
#1 Behavioral Repair Work
As social beings, some of the most painful regrets we have involve other people:
Do you need to apologize to someone?
Do you need to have closure?
Do you have something to tell someone?
Don’t wait. Call them now. Text them now. Tell someone right now that you love them. Whatever it is–you don’t want risk completely losing contact with someone forever without attempting to make peace with them or share how you truly feel.
#2 Live an Experimental Life
A major regret for many people is failing to try things because they were scared or some other obstacle held them back.
Have you always been wanting to learn how to do___?
Have you always wanted to try___?
Have you always wanted to know more about___?
If you thought yes to any of those questions, now is your time. I recommend creating a learning bucket list. This is a list of the skills and things you’ve always wanted to learn or try. Be sure to start yours and check out our article on bucket lists.
#3 Psychological Repair Work
Gilovich says we’re in need of psychological repair work when we’re processing emotions and past experiences that weigh us down.
Do you need to identify a silver-lining?
Learn from an experience?
Find the something positive in something negative?
Don’t wait. Don’t push it to the corner of your mind. Research shows that not reconciling with our past emotional problems can have lasting effects on how we cope with stresses in the present. Until you deal with your problems, they’ll exaggerate your reactions to similar stressors and prevent you from fully moving forward.
Take a walk, grab a journal, ask a friend to come over and process. Don’t let it emotionally weigh you down.
What About All Your Current Regrets?
You’ve just committed to living a regret-free life moving forward, but how do you deal with the pain of the regrets you already have? The science shows that one of the best solutions is to just say “Screw it, I did the best that I could and it’s not my fault,” and move on.
A German study placed a group of depressed, regret-prone people and a group of positive regret-free seniors in scenarios where they inevitably made mistakes that could prompt regret. While the regret-prone group took their mistakes personally, the happy seniors maintained their emotional well-being throughout the experiment by focusing on moving forward rather than dwelling on the problems they faced.
Regret and Self-Love
Of course, it may not be possible to instantaneously rid yourself of all feelings of responsibility for events you regret. This is where self-compassion comes in. According to researchers at the University of California, Berkeley, one of the most effective strategies for overcoming your regrets is self-compassion.
Take time to reflect on the decisions that you regret and realize that yes, you may have done some awful things that make you want to reverse time, but those actions do not define you and the fact that you regret them proves that you are better than your mistakes. It’s this kind of compassionate attitude that allowed the happy seniors to live regret free; they accepted their mistakes and focused on making better decisions moving forward.
Today is your day to begin living a regret free life. I’d love to hear about your experiences so let me know @Vvanedwards.
Want more? Sign-up below to get access to the Science of People Monthly Insights for the latest human behavior hacks:I have a question for you:
Would you rather break an arm or be broken up with? We asked our Twitter followers this question and 76% said they would rather break an arm, while 24% said they would rather be broken up with.
This response is stunning, because breaking an arm is painful, expensive, and has a big effect on your life.
Yet, for most people, the metaphorical breaking of our heart hurts worse than physical pain and there is science to back this up.
Why Breakups Hurt So Much
Researcher Naomi Eisenberg at UCLA discovered that social pain (such as being rejected and let down by others) and physical pain are felt in the same parts of the brain.
In other words, the brain can’t tell the difference between the pain of a breakup and the pain of a broken arm. When I read this study, it was like a light-bulb going off. I had an extremely hard time in high school and college fitting in, and I just never really felt like I belonged anywhere. Most of my friends rushed the Greek system or played sports, and I couldn’t find my place. So, I escaped into my books and into my technical skills and science, but there was a lot of pain there for me from feeling rejected by my peers.
When I read this study, it made me realize that the hurt I felt from being left out was not something I made up; it was real.
If you’ve ever felt broken by a lack of social connection or the sudden loss of a relationship that you depended on, know that your pain is real too and, just like with most physical injuries, there are actions you can take to feel better.
How to Heal Social Pain
The challenging thing about dealing with breakups and other forms of social rejection is that, unlike with a broken arm, you can’t go to a doctor, receive treatment or be told an approximate date that you are going to be healed. Recovery takes time, butluckily, researchers have discovered a few strategies to speed up the process.
#1 Reflect on your breakup and newly single status
One of the effects of breaking up that is the most difficult to cope with is losing your identity as your ex’s partner. Research shows that taking some time to talk with a friend about why your breakup happened and who you are going to be moving forward can help you to heal faster than if you keep your hurt and confused feelings to yourself.
#2 Invest more in your other relationships
Because humans are social creatures, studies have found that much of our mood stability and happiness comes from our relationships. When you experience a breakup, you need to replace the positive, connection hormones you got from your ex by strengthening your relationships with other people.
#3 Keep your distance
While it may be tempting to stay in touch with your ex or worse, stalk them on social media, studies show that we need to create space between us and the person who hurt us in order to overcome the emotional pain. Once you no longer cringe at the thought of your ex, then you’re ready to develop a friendship with them.
If you have social pain, you are not alone. My entire mission at the Science of People is to give you tools to find a community of people just like you who will give you unconditional support. I feel you, I see you, and I am with you.

The formula for fascinating conversation
How to walk into a room full of strangers and make a killer first impression
Our strategy for hacking the people code–we call it the matrix (Keanu Reeves not included with each book sale)
The art and science of understanding people
Learn the new–science based way for winning friends and influencing people.Do you struggle to understand your boss? If you’re working for someone whose actions and demands are a source of frustration and confusion, the problem likely lies not in their behavior but in your lack of understanding of the personality traits that influence their behavior.
For nearly a century, psychologists have been studying the science of personality and they’ve concluded that five traits, known as the Big 5, can be accurately used to understand people’s personalities and behaviors. They are:
Openness
Conscientiousness
Extroversion
Agreeableness
Neuroticism
An easy way to remember the Big 5 is using the acronym OCEAN. Each of these traits are spectrums and how high or low someone falls on them determines their personality. Learning your boss’s personality is the key to knowing what they need from you. To help me explain how, I asked my wonderful employee Danielle to decode my personality and share how you can use personality science to better understand your boss too.
Check it out:
Breaking Down Your Boss’s Personality
is your feeling and tendency to like new ideas. People who are high-open are curious and thrive on change. High-open bosses love brainstorming ways to improve, but can be very side-tracked, so you may want to focus on making sure they finish things.
Low-open bosses love structure and are resistant to change. To avoid overwhelming them, limit how frequently you share your new ideas and when you do share them, focus on how they integrate into the systems that are already in place.
Conscientiousness
is how dependable you are and how much you like organization. If you have a boss who demands that every little detail is exactly as they want it and who is obsessed with to-do lists, they’re high conscientious. When working for this type of leader, you must be organized and detail-oriented to stay on their good side.
However, if you have a low conscientious boss, spare them any information that isn’t essential for them to know. They are big-picture oriented and would much rather focus on long-term growth than the specific steps you’re taking to complete a project.
is how your energy level is affected by people. Extroverts become more energized when they are around others while introverts often find social situations draining and need alone time to recharge.
If you have a boss who frequently stops by your desk for light chats, they are likely an extrovert who depends on those interactions to feel their best. On the other hand, if you have a boss who keeps to themselves, know that they are probably an introvert who needs to be alone to focus. Only interrupt them during work hours for conversations that are relevant to what you are working on.
is based on whether your gut instinct response to someone asking you for something is “Yes” or “No/I need to think about.” Highly agreeable bosses want to cooperate and make people happy in the moment, often leading them to agree to things that they don’t always follow through on because they later realize it is not the best decision. To get an honest answer from a highly agreeable boss, give them the opportunity to disagree.
Low agreeable bosses are the exact opposite. They are hesitant to accept ideas that are not their own and have no problem shutting people down. If you want them to agree to something, support your requests with information proving your request is valid and give them time to think about your evidence before demanding a response.
is your tendency to feel anxiety and how you process being worried. High neurotic bosses take longer to relax after stressful events and they are constantly worried about what-if scenarios. The best gift you can give a boss with this personality trait is thinking ahead and solving potential problems before they become a source of stress.
If you rarely see your boss stressed out, it’s likely that they are a low-neurotic. Instead of doing things to keep them calm, focus on your own emotional stability at work. Since they are less emotional themselves, they may struggle to understand your anxiety and/or find it irritating.
Want to know your personality type?
Take the official 44-Question test. You can also ask your boss and coworkers to take it so everyone on your team understands each other’s’ personality traits.Stress is a worldwide epidemic.
According to the Global Organization for Stress, at least 60% of working adults in major global economies are stressed and that statistic is even higher in countries like Australia where it’s estimated that 91% of citizens are stressed out about some area of their lives and America where it’s estimated that at any given time, 75% of the population is experiencing high levels of stress.
Standard thinking says that this a terrible issue and people need to change their lifestyles to relax more.
But what if the feeling of stress itself isn’t the problem?
Research has found that the only people who experience the lasting, harmful effects of stress are those who believe that their stress is hurting them; people who don’t think stress is a bad thing are able to deal with their problems symptom-free. It turns out that stress can be hacked and with the right mindset and coping strategies, it can have a positive impact on your life.
Last month we chose The Upside of Stress by Stanford psychologist Kelly McGonigal to learn how to conquer the stress in our lives. Here are my favorite lessons from the book.
The Evolutionary Benefits of Stress
When handled properly, stress can be one your greatest assets for boosting productivity and performance in challenging situations. In the book, McGonigal explained these five benefits of stress, among others:
It increases your energy levels. When you choose to harness it, rather than hate it, stress can be the source of energy and motivation you need to tackle your problems head on.
It fuels flow states. If your stress doesn’t lead to panic, it helps you increase your focus on your triggers and efficiently develop beneficial solutions.
It makes you more productive. One study in the book found that worldwide national stress levels are positively correlated with each country’s well-being as measured by GDP and other factors. In other words, stress inspires people to create more.
It rewires your brain to learn from experiences. To avoid dealing with the same stressful situation again, our brains alter our perceptions and reactions toward our triggers. This prevents you from repeating mistakes.
It makes you more resilient. If you choose to learn from stressful experiences and reflect on how you overcame them, it can heighten your threshold for stress so that small issues no longer worry you.
If you read this list and are wondering why you don’t always experience these benefits when you are stressed, it’s likely you are approaching stress the wrong way.
Your Perspective of Stress is Reality
Our beliefs directly affect our body’s physiological behaviors. Columbia research psychologist Alia Crum has conducted research that shows that our mindsets shape our physical reality. In one shocking study, her team told housekeepers that their work was exercise and gave them estimates of how many calories they burned per task. Within one month, they lost weight while the housekeepers who were told nothing remained in the same physical state. Simply believing that they were burning calories by working caused their bodies to burn more calories as if they were engaging in more rigorous exercise.
Your body reacts the same way to your beliefs about stress. Whether you think stress is harmful and something that should be avoided or that it’s a positive sign that you’re pushing through a difficult situation, determines what type of stress response you have.
McGonigal’s research found that people with negative perceptions of stress are more likely to experience fight-or-flight stress responses. This includes the commonly feared reactions to stress such as feeling panicked, an inability to focus, acting irrationally etc. People experience these symptoms because their bodies release large quantities of cortisol and other potentially damaging hormones.
On the flip side, people who embrace stress as a positive feeling, experience a challenge stress response. This is the type of stress response that gives you an intense desire to prove yourself, heightens your focus under pressure and gives you the energy you need to succeed in whatever situation you are in. People with positive beliefs about stress have these advantages because their bodies produce higher levels of DHEA–the performance-boosting stress hormone.
How to Hack Stress
Changing your perspective and reaction to stress can take time if you’re used to regarding it as a menace in your life. While you work on accepting that stress can be a positive feeling, McGonigal recommends a couple of coping mechanisms that can help fight stress and improve your life.
Tend and Befriend: When we’re stressed out, a common reaction is to focus on ourselves which can make our problems seem more extreme than they are. A solution to this is to channel your stressful energy into tending to the people around you and befriending new people whom you can form mutually supportive relationships with. Doing this boosts your oxytocin levels (the bonding hormone) and can lower your stress levels by distracting you from yourself, making you feel good for helping other people and allowing you to feel more secure in your relationships.
Set Bigger than Yourself Goals: A lot of stress can be eliminated from your life by switching your focus from achieving perfection in the moment to succeeding in ideological goals in the long-run. When your mindset is focused on goals that are bigger than yourself whether they’re family-related like raising your children to be kind, work-related such as reaching a career milestone that is far beyond your current capabilities or they’re related to a personal passion such as completing a triathlon–pursuing larger-than-life goals helps you forget about all of life’s little bumps as well as reduces stress for smaller issues.
Bottom line: You can’t control the difficult circumstances life throws at you, but by reframing your perspective on stress, you can drastically lower your stress levels and use your remaining stress to boost your performance and improve your relationships.

The formula for fascinating conversation
How to walk into a room full of strangers and make a killer first impression
Our strategy for hacking the people code–we call it the matrix (Keanu Reeves not included with each book sale)
The art and science of understanding people
Learn the new–science based way for winning friends and influencing people.I have this little problem: I tend to think that people are talking about me behind my back. It’s totally paranoid and ridiculous, but I wanted to know if I was alone. So, I asked our Twitter followers if they agreed with this statement: “I often think people are talking about me behind my back.”
30% of people replied True and 70% said False. There is a third of you who also experiences this paranoia. The question is, is there any science to this?
Gossiping is in Our Genes
It turns out the 30% of people like me who are paranoid have good reason to be. Researchers estimate that anywhere from 65% to 80% of conversations are gossip. Those statistics are based on the percentage of conversations that we have about people–both positive and negative. As social creatures, we focus a lot of our attention on other people and that comes through in what we talk about.
So, chances are, people are talking about you behind your back but it’s not necessarily a bad thing.
Psychologists theorize that talking about other people is a habit that likely evolved as a safety mechanism. Thousands of years ago, when humans lived in small hunter-gather societies, people’s survival depended on them knowing who they could trust and who they should avoid. Gossiping helped people keep tabs on who was the most volatile and likely to betray members of the group, who was the most dependable and whose families’ were the healthiest and best to reproduce with.
What’s even more powerful is that our brains pay more attention to people we’ve heard negative gossip about. Talking about others behind their back gives people a greater sense of awareness so they can be on guard around potentially threatening individuals.
Warning: Think about the consequences before talking about your drama. Telling others about the annoying and/or hurtful things people have done to you can turn a temporary disagreement into a long-term problem where people struggle to feel comfortable around the person you spoke negatively about.
Talking About Others Fights Uncertainty
Another reason researchers believe that people love to talk about others behind their backs is the sense of certainty that it provides. Given the huge role that people play in our lives, we have an innate need to be able to understand and predict people’s behavior. Telling stories about other people while speculating about and/or filling in the blanks of what we don’t know helps us make sense of the individuals in our social circles.
It also encourages pro-social, conformist behavior. Stanford researchers discovered that our natural tendency to criticize people behind their backs fosters group unity because people fear the social consequences of acting in ways that may cause rumors to spread about them.
While this limits individualism, groups depend on knowing that their members are going to act roughly according to their norms. When one member chooses to behave differently, it lessens the group’s sense of stability. Gossiping is a way for people to rationalize the individual’s surprising actions and discourage other people from creating a similar upset.

The formula for fascinating conversation
How to walk into a room full of strangers and make a killer first impression
What to do to increase your impact and income using people skills
Our strategy for hacking the people code–we call it the matrix (Keanu Reeves not included with each book sale)
The art and science of understanding people
Learn the new–science based way for winning friends and influencing people.Have you ever been talking to someone and they keep talking and talking and talking and talking and you can’t get them to stop talking? You don’t want to be rude by directly interrupting them, but you really need (and want) to end the conversation.
Luckily there are some easy ways to get out of those situations. Check out my video for some nonverbal tricks you can use to get people to stop talking.
These are some tips that I have used in my own life, I’m not proud of them, but they do help to get people to wrap up their thoughts. There are different levels for getting someone to stop talking. We’re going to start with the least aggressive and level up for more challenging situations.
Level 1: The Fish
Let’s say that you’re talking to someone and they just keeping going and going. We intuitively know that when someone opens their mouth to say something they should stop talking. One thing you can try is opening your mouth at them just like a fish:
When you open your mouth it indicates that you have something to say. Even if you don’t let any words out of your mouth while they are still talking, just the act of slightly opening your mouth will often get people to wrap up to give you a turn to speak.
Level 2: The Bookmark
The bookmark looks like this:
You’re putting your hand out to show that you want to add something. The movement of your hand should draw the other person’s attention to you and the gesture itself resembles a stop or wait emblem, which should prompt them to pause. The bookmark works especially well when you pair it with the fish.
Level 3: The Pupil
If they’re still talking after giving them the fish and the bookmark then it’s time to move up to level three and give them a stronger cue. The pupil is when you literally raise your hand as if you have something to say in a classroom. From sitting through years of school we know that when someone raises their hand it means they have something they want to share. It also has a very subtle nonverbal gesture that means stop.
If the person you’re talking to is so into their monologue that they’re not paying attention to your gestures, it’s time to move up to level four.
Level 4: The Touch
When you really have to end the conversation, reach out and touch the other person’s arm and tell them it was great speaking with them. This pulls people out of their monologues because while they may not pay attention to your facial expressions or gestures, they will notice if you touch them.
Even people who love to talk will usually become silent for a moment when they are touched. Use their moment of silence to jump in and say your goodbye.
Level 5: The Teacher
I cringe thinking about it because it’s super aggressive but it can work in a big group of people. Let’s say everyone is talking at once and you don’t want to get too crazy by yelling–try The Teacher:
When we see a teacher do this gesture, it usually means “wait a moment” or “shh” and we will be quiet. So if you want to get a group to quiet down, you can raise your finger up and look around to grab everyone’s attention. Make sure you’re standing in a location where the majority of people whom you want to stop talking can see you. Otherwise, this strategy fails to have its full effect.
Remember, these tactics rank in order of aggressiveness so always start with 1 and work your way up to 5 to avoid unnecessarily coming across as socially aggressive.
Bonus Tip: If you’re going to have a conversation with someone who you know is likely to interrupt you, you can discourage them from doing so by telling them how much you want to say. For example, if you have three points you need to make, tell them you have three things to say. This is called “preventative flagging” and it discourages interruptions by giving people a clear idea of how long you expect to talk.
Want to learn more social hacks? Sign up for our Science of People monthly insights:
When you sign-up, something magical happens. Let us explain:I’ve always been fascinated by how our emotions work. To me, it intuitively seemed like they’re all in our heads. I thought that all we needed to do to understand our emotional states and to get out of them was logic. My perspective changed when I read an amazing study by Aalto University that revealed that we experience our feelings in different and specific parts of our body.
See how:
Emotions Are Felt From Head to Toe
As you can see, different parts of our bodies experience changes in activity levels when we feel different emotions.
In the image, yellow/red shows above-average activity and blue shows below-average activity.
Evolutionarily, it makes sense that our bodies exhibit these changes because they prepare us to react on behalf of our emotions.
For example, when we are angry our upper body, arms, and feet have more energy because our bodies are preparing to fight. Or, with surprise, our eyes show more activity because they need to open as wide as possible to take in the sight of whatever caught us off guard.
People Can Spot Your Hidden Emotions
When I was conducting research for my book Captivate, I sought to gain a deeper understanding of how emotions work, and I stumbled upon a little people puzzle. We ran two different polls on twitter where we asked two sets of similar questions.
The first question was: “When I am nervous on the inside, I can disguise it very well from others.” True or false? 60% agreed with that statement, 40% did not.
The next question we asked was “I can instantly spot a phony the minute I meet him or her. True or false? 67% replied true and 33% replied false
Do you see the contradiction? Most of us feel like we can hide our emotions but we also think that we can spot others when they are faking it. What this reveals is that we often think we are more in control of our emotions than we actually are. So if you’re going to events you don’t like, you’re going on dates you don’t want to be on, or you’re putting yourself in other social situations you make you uncomfortable, you may think you’re putting on a good face but it’s hard to hide that anxiety–you feel it and show it in your body.
Thrive in Your Social Life
To avoid coming across as a phony by faking a positive attitude, I want you to think about how can you be more you! How can you show up to places you really like? Your social life will become so much more enjoyable when you base your decisions on what works for you and not other people.
This is the basis of one my favorite tips in my book Captivate which is that you should only show up to places where you thrive. These are places where you genuinely enjoy the interactions you have with people. Right now I want you to think of three places that fit that description.
Now I want you to think of three places where you barely survive. These are places where you don’t enjoy hanging out with other people and spend the majority of time wishing you could leave. When you go to places where you don’t like being there, people can tell.
You’re much better off socializing in places and with people that bring out your best self.

The formula for fascinating conversation
How to walk into a room full of strangers and make a killer first impression
What to do to increase your impact and income using people skills
Our strategy for hacking the people code–we call it the matrix (Keanu Reeves not included with each book sale)
The art and science of understanding people
Learn the new–science based way for winning friends and influencing people.I recently read an amazing book by Benjamin Zander and Rosamund Stone called The Art of Possibility. While I was reading, there was a particular passage that popped out at me and it got me thinking about how our childhood shapes our personalities.
Here at the Science of People, we love studying personality because it has drastic effects on how we interact with people. Research shows that between 30-58% of our personality is genetic while the rest is based on our experiences.
Keep reading to dig into the science of personality.
What is Personality?
Obviously, we all have an idea of personality is, but what you may not know is that all of our traits can be summarized by five key key traits known as the Big Five. Here they are:
Openness:
How creative, imaginary and open to new ideas you are.
Openness has 57% genetic influence
Conscientiousness:
How organized and detail-oriented you are.
Conscientiousness has 49% genetic influence
Extraversion:
How you relate to people and how outgoing you are.
Extraversion has 54% genetic influence
Agreeableness:
How well you work with others and how easy-going you are.
Agreeableness has 42% genetic influence
Neuroticism:
How much you worry and how emotionally stable you are.
Neuroticism has 48% genetic influence
Your Personality Affects How You Form Relationships
Researchers have found that our personality traits, combined with the experiences we have with people during our formative years, play a huge role in our attachment styles. Attachment styles describe how comfortable we are in forming relationships.
There are three attachment styles. Read on to determine which style sounds like you or take our official quiz:
Secure
This is the most stable attachment style. People who are secure in their relationships are easily able to form healthy relationships based on mutual trust and respect. They also have the emotional strength to stand up for themselves and let go of toxic relationships.
Anxious
People with this attachment style feel insecure in their relationships. They fear that people are going to leave them and/or that they are not good enough. These individuals are generally prone to experiencing intense negative emotions in their relationships. As a result, they are prone to investing too much in toxic people and acting irrationally.
Avoidant
Like those with an anxious attachment style, those with an avoidant attachment style feel insecure in their relationships. The difference is that instead of worrying about preserving their relationships, people with an avoidant attachment style avoid opening themselves up to people. They struggle to form close bonds because it takes them a long time to trust people and feel comfortable being themselves.
Knowing your personality traits and attachment style is helpful because if you are anxious or avoidant, it allows you to be aware of how your attachment style is affecting your relationships and how to take action to become more secure.
Not sure where you fall? Here are some clues based on your personality:
High neuroticism is correlated with having an anxious attachment style
Low agreeableness is correlated with having an avoidant attachment style
Low extraversion (aka introversion) is correlated with having an avoidant attachment style
Low openness is correlated with having a an avoidant attachment style
Nurture’s Powerful Influence
Though genetics set the foundation for who we are, how you were nurtured contributes to 42-70% of your personality.
Ask yourself these questions to understand what role your childhood experiences played in making you the person you are today:
What habits have you created to help you get out of childhood alive?
What roles did you serve in your family or with your siblings or with parents that set you up for who you are today?
What experiences influenced the way you live your life?
These are my thought questions for you for the week and I hope that you’ll ask your coworkers and family and friends to join you in exploring where your personality comes from.
Want to dig a little deeper into the science of personality? Check out Chapter #7 of Captivate!
Book Description:
Do you wish you could decode people? Do you want a formula for charisma? Do you want to know exactly what to say to your boss, your date or your networking partner? You need to know how people work.
As a human behavior investigator, Vanessa Van Edwards studies the hidden forces that drive our behavior patterns in her lab—and she’s cracked the code. In Captivate she shares a wealth of valuable shortcuts, systems and behavior hacks for taking charge of their interactions at work, at home, and in any social situation. These aren’t the people skills you learned in school. This is the first comprehensive, science backed, real life manual on human behavior and a completely new approach to building connections.How do some people achieve extraordinary levels of success when pursuing their passions while others chase their dreams but never reach any finish lines?
The secret, according to entrepreneur and bestselling author Gary Keller, is that they have one thing – a visionary goal for their lives – that influences every decision they make. Regardless of what happens, having that driving force keeps them on the right path.
This month we chose The One Thing by Gary Keller and Jay Papasan to learn how to find our one thing and how to use it to transform our lives. Here are my five favorite lessons from the book:
#1 What is Your One Thing?
What is the one thing that you are the most passionate about? Throughout the book, Keller emphasizes that before you can make any significant progress in your life, you need to know what you are aiming for.
While it may be challenging to pick the passion that is the most important to you, it is the only way to achieve high levels of success. With the exception of rare, extraordinary individuals like Elon Musk, people can’t become masters at multiple things at the same time.
Your answer doesn’t have to be career-related. If family is the center of your universe, your one thing could be being the best parent you can be. Or, if you have a passion for helping people in a specific way, your one thing can be about helping an organization related to your cause. The important thing is that your one thing inspires you to wake up every day and give your all pursuing it.
If you don’t know what your one thing is yet, Keller recommends starting by heading in the direction that you want to go. Learn as much as you can about your area of interest and once you figure out what makes you feel the most alive, that becomes your one thing.
#2 Chase After “Big Specific Goals”
Once you’ve chosen your one thing, you need to create goals that will help you achieve it. Keller argues that the best goals are big and specific.
Big specific goals are:
Big enough that you currently don’t have the skills to achieve them and will force you out of your comfort zone.
Specific enough that you can identify clear actions steps.
Once you know your goals, write them down. Keller cited research from Dr. Gail Matthews of the Dominican University of California that found that people who write down their goals are 39.5% more likely to achieve them. The effect is even more powerful if you share your goals with someone else. It may feel nerve-wracking to tell people about goals you may not feel confident you can achieve, but knowing they are going to hold you accountable is a great way to ensure your success.
#3 Live by the Pareto Principle
The Pareto Principle is simple: different activities generate different amounts of value using the same quantities of time and resources. This principle was created by Italian economist Vilfredo Pareto and it is the basis for was it popularly known now as the 80/20 rule. It’s the idea that approximately 20% of what we do (our most important tasks) generates about 80% of the value in our lives.
One of the greatest inhibitors to success is the belief that we need to give everything our all. While it sounds like a great aspiration, our lives are too busy to give every task 100% of our effort. Instead, we complete everything at an acceptable level of quality while excelling at nothing.
To achieve your goals, you need to identify the 20% of tasks that generate most of the value in your life and invest your best energy into them. Doing so will require that you set boundaries and eliminate tasks that don’t add any value – this includes saying no to requests from people that aren’t absolutely necessary for you to say yes to.
#4 Don’t Fall Victim to Productivity Myths
Being busy and being productive are two completely different things. Being busy means you’re doing things; being productive is doing things that have a positive impact on your life. In an effort to have it all, many people fall into two productivity traps:
Living their lives according to to-do lists.
Believing that multitasking is an efficient way to complete tasks.
The problem with both of these tactics is that they help people manage their busyness not prioritize for productivity.
The majority of tasks on to-do lists fail to generate meaningful value and research shows that people who multitask perform worse than those who complete tasks one at a time.
Keller suggests that you replace those practices by determining what are the most meaningful projects and relationships in your life and making it your priority to invest time in those things every day. When you do, focus on being present in the moment; the most important parts of your life need your full attention to thrive.
#5 Choose Your Daily Domino
Once you know your one thing and the other most important elements of your life, it’s time to incorporate these lessons into your everyday life. Just like how your one thing guides the trajectory of your life, every day you need to choose the one thing that you need to complete to move yourself one step closer to achieving your goals.
Chosen correctly, that one thing will set off a domino effect that leads you to accomplish more than you thought you could possibly derive from a single action.
For example, say your one thing for the day is to attend a networking event. Even if you only make one or two lasting connections at that event, those people can introduce you to more people and resources, who then do the same and the effects of that one thing continue to multiply like the impact of the first domino in a long chain. Or, your one thing could be to sign up for a class or read a book. The knowledge you learn may inspire you to approach your goals in a new way and speed up your success. The key is to choose daily dominos that have long-run impacts.

The formula for fascinating conversation
How to walk into a room full of strangers and make a killer first impression
Our strategy for hacking the people code–we call it the matrix (Keanu Reeves not included with each book sale)
The art and science of understanding people
Learn the new–science based way for winning friends and influencing people.We chatted with the Wall Street Journal this month on conversation, getting deep with people and of course, avoiding social scripts. Check it out:
What seems like banal banter can turn into something more meaningful—and even help your career—if you know how to steer the conversation.
By Sue Shellenbarger
We’ve all gotten mired in banal small talk at some point. What if there were a way to avoid that conversational quicksand?
If someone says, “I just got back from vacation,” three in four people give a dead-end reply like, “Boy, do I need one of those.” A more inviting question, such as, “What was your favorite day like?” can keep the conversation from dying on the vine, according to research by Contacts Count,​a Newtown, Pa., consulting and training firm that advises employers on networking.
Much of our day-to-day talk is a missed opportunity. The ability to draw others into meaningful conversations can determine whether people want to get to know you, or remember you at all. Failure to learn it can stall your career.
Check out more of our media features here!Your pictures reveal huge amounts of information about you.
An amazing study done by Nalini Ambady that looked at CEOs’ faces found that people can glance at a picture of a CEO and predict how successful he or she is. Specifically, Ambady showed participants pictures of the top 25 CEOs on the Fortune 500 list and pictures of the bottom 25 CEOs and asked people to rate them on leadership qualities like intelligence, power and charisma. Here’s what’s crazy: People’s leadership rankings matched the pictures. In other words, people who looked the most successful were the most successful.
The problem is most of us have no idea what our Facebook profile, Twitter picture or dating headshot says about us.
Check out our video on how to take the perfect selfie:
Here are 6 tips to help you take better pictures:
#1 Smile Don’t Smirk
The first cardinal sin of profile pictures is the smirk. So many people make this mistake without even realizing it! Why is this so bad? The smirk is the universal facial expression for contempt, hatred and disdain. So if this is in your profile you are basically telling the world you don’t want people to connect with you!
Here’s what contempt looks like so you know what to avoid:
Instead of smirking, opt for a genuine smile that shows you’re a positive person to be around.
#2 Wear Bright Colors to Look Younger
Color psychologists have discovered that we naturally judge people based on the colors they wear. Bright, high-energy colors like yellow and orange are symbolic of youth and can take years off of your appearance. Plus, bright colors can be used to add a fun pop to your outfits.
#3 Look Fun and Confident with Expansion
Harvard Business School researcher Amy Cuddy discovered that there are universal power body language moves. If you want to show confidence, power and charisma in your photos you have to know these rules:
The more physical space someone takes up with their body, the more confident they appear and feel.
Strong body language is when the forehead and chest are pointed up and shoulders are rolled back.
Powerful, confident people aren’t afraid to open up their body especially their torso and chest so that they are free of barriers—uncrossed arms and legs.
I did a body language shoot with the amazingly talented Maggie Hudson of Honeysuckle Photography. In these pictures you can see the more physical space I take up, the more I have my body open with my chest and head up, the more confident I look:
#4 Pose Professionally
If you want to maintain a professional image, make sure you look the part in your pictures. When kids take pictures they often slouch and look slightly away from the camera because they’re distracted and move their bodies in some way. To look older in pictures, you need to avoid childish poses and present yourself as if you are having your picture taken for work.Use these techniques to look serious and professional:
Fronting (facing the camera full on)
Stand/sit straight (no slouching)
Show less movement (unless you’re trying to capture a moment, don’t do any actions in your photos)
#5 Stick Your Chin Out
Want to avoid the double chin? An easy trick is to slightly jut your chin out to give your jaw a more defined look. Beauty blogger Perrie Samotin says you can even put your tongue on the roof of your mouth to tighten your facial muscles (a trick supposedly used by Heidi Klum!).
#6 Angle the Camera to Create the Illusion of Height
Insecure about your short height? At a petite 5’3, fashion blogger Kat Collings knows a thing or two about how to look taller in pictures. She did an experiment taking pictures with the camera positioned at different angles and found that pictures taken from below make you look the tallest. Since the camera is angled up, it elongates your figure and gives the illusion of more height.
Did you love these 6 tips? We have 14 more hacks for you to check out in our newest book Captivate!
Book Description:
Do you wish you could decode people? Do you want a formula for charisma? Do you want to know exactly what to say to your boss, your date or your networking partner? You need to know how people work.
As a human behavior investigator, Vanessa Van Edwards studies the hidden forces that drive our behavior patterns in her lab—and she’s cracked the code. In Captivate she shares a wealth of valuable shortcuts, systems and behavior hacks for taking charge of their interactions at work, at home, and in any social situation. These aren’t the people skills you learned in school. This is the first comprehensive, science backed, real life manual on human behavior and a completely new approach to building connections.One time I was hanging out with a friend whose husband was away for the weekend. It was nice out so we went for a hike and out for brunch. We had a lovely morning, but once it came time to say goodbye, my friend’s behavior changed. She began questioning me for any excuse to continue hanging out. The conversation went like this:
Do you want to go shopping? I said no thanks, I’m trying to save money.
So then she asked if I wanted to get my nails done. I replied no, I can do that myself. So she asked if I wanted to run errands with her, again I replied no. I have my own errands. Then she suggested she could run errands with me.
Finally I asked her what was wrong; there had to be a reason why she was determined not to part ways.
She explained that with her husband was away for the weekend, her house was empty and she was uncomfortable being alone.
It turns out my friend isn’t the only person who is afraid of being alone. We asked our twitter followers if they agreed with this statement: “I am afraid of being alone.” Thirty-two percent of our followers responded true which means at least a third of you struggle to be alone. If you struggle with this problem, I want to help.
I think that being alone is an incredibly important life skill that we are not taught. It means being able to amuse yourself, to be capable of bringing yourself out of a funk, and most importantly, knowing how to be alone means feeling comfortable in your own thoughts and the reality that you are strong enough to be independent.
Being alone can be amazing recharge, reflection, fun time if you know how to do it right.
Here is my three step solution to help you overcome your fear of being alone:
Step 1: Use the Carrot Method
It should be no surprise that psychologists have discovered that how much we want the rewards for completing a task determines how dedicated we are to success. If you want to feel comfortable being alone, you need to plan awesome things to do alone so you enjoy the experience.
Here are a few examples:
Have a favorite netflix show you want to watch? Decide you can only do it when you are alone.
Want to grab a special treat? Get it for a date night with yourself.
Do you have a favorite band that your friends aren’t a fan of? Take yourself to a concert.
This way you look forward to the carrot (reward) instead of dreading the negative emotions you normally associate with being alone.
Step 2: Baby Steps
It’s nearly impossible to overcome any fear in an instant. To avoid creating more negative memories of being alone, you need to start by taking baby steps that are less likely to trigger your anxiety.
When you’re first learning how to be alone, don’t plan a whole day outing by yourself–that may be too overwhelming and may make you want to give up on learning to be alone. In the beginning, start small by doing things like getting a latte by yourself, then maybe an ice cream, then maybe a dinner. Gradually increase the amount of time you spend alone until you feel comfortable spending a whole weekend by yourself.
Challenge: Set one mini-date with yourself right now.
Step 3: Reflection is Powerful
Sometimes you come up with your best ideas and insights when you are on your own. Why? You let your mind wander. My challenge for you is to skip working, skip watching and skip social media on an alone outing. Just bring a pad of paper and a pen and see what pops into your head.
I got the idea for my latest book Captivate while taking myself on a solo hike. It literally popped into my head as I was walking and I stopped in the middle of the trail and was like, “Whoa, I need to write a behavior hack guide.” Just like people write computer programming guides, I wanted to write one for people and boom, a year later I had a book.
Bottom line: You never know when an idea is just waiting to pop into your head.

The formula for fascinating conversation
How to walk into a room full of strangers and make a killer first impression
Our strategy for hacking the people code–we call it the matrix (Keanu Reeves not included with each book sale)
The art and science of understanding people
Learn the new–science based way for winning friends and influencing people.Do you have a hard time saying no? As social beings, we are driven to preserve our relationships and so it can be difficult to let people down even if it is the right thing for you.
When I asked my Twitter followers if they agreed with this statement: “I have a hard time saying no,” 48% of people replied that it was true for them and 52% replied that it wasn’t.
That means that about half of you struggle to say no when people make requests of you that you don’t want to agree to.
As someone who struggles with saying no myself, I decided to learn how to say no without being awkward, damaging relationships, or feeling guilty. Check it out:
Keep these three tactics in mind any time you’re in a situation where you need to say no.
#1 Plan Out Your No’s Ahead of Time
It can be difficult to tell someone no in the moment. If you you struggle to say no because you fear facing people’s disappointment, ask people to text or email you their request so you can get back to them. You’re a busy person so it’s perfectly reasonable for you to say that you need to check your schedule before answering. Once they send you a follow-up, it is much easier to send them a polite reply saying that you’re unable to agree to their request.
#2 Don’t Offer an Explanation
Offering an excuse may seem like the polite way to decline a request but it sets you up for an awkward situation. The problem with offering an excuse is it gives people the opportunity to change their request so that your excuse doesn’t justify your no.
Here are some examples:
You decline someone’s invitation to go out for coffee because you already have plans on the day they requested…then they ask you what day works best for you.
You tell someone you can’t go to a party because you have no one to watch the kids…they offer to let you bring your kids.
You apologize for not being able to help someone with a project because you’re working towards a major deadline…they reply that they’d love to have your help once you’re finished with your current project.
No matter what excuse you offer, people who are determined to get you to say yes can come up with a way to invalidate it. By simply thanking people for their request and telling them that you can’t agree to it, you prevent them from arguing with you.
#3 Do Offer An Alternative
If the person asking you for something is someone who you want to maintain a positive relationship with, you can lessen the impact of your no by offering an alternative that satisfies their want while being something that is more preferable to you.
For example:
If someone wants you to collaborate with them on a project, introduce them to someone else who might be interested.
Your new friend invites you to a bar but loud places and drinking isn’t your thing. Ask them if they want to grab coffee or do another activity instead.
An eager young employee in your office offers to help you with an important project but you fear their involvement would slow down progress. Ask them if they want to work with you on a lower pressure project instead.
The goal is to offer compromise so they don’t take offense to you saying no and you don’t feel guilty for turning down a request that would add unneeded stress to your life.

The formula for fascinating conversation
How to walk into a room full of strangers and make a killer first impression
What to do to increase your impact and income using people skills
Our strategy for hacking the people code–we call it the matrix (Keanu Reeves not included with each book sale)
The art and science of understanding people
Learn the new–science based way for winning friends and influencing people.Do you ever run out of interesting things to say? In our weekly Twitter poll, we asked people whether this statement was true or false for them: “When in a group of people I have trouble thinking of the right things to talk about.”
68% of people responded true so I decided to make a video to help you never run out of interesting things to say. Check it out:
Having conversations with people you don’t know well can be awkward but it doesn’t have to be.
Here are my three secrets for never running out of interesting things to say.
#1 Read Interesting Articles
The key to avoiding awkward silences is to know lots of fun facts and stories that you can share in conversations. Take a bit of time every week to read articles about the topics you and the people you talk to are interested in. This way, you always have fresh and exciting ideas to share and be able to comment on the topics that other people bring up.
These are my favorite sources of information:
Entrepreneur Magazine – It’s full of stories about startups transforming their industries, personal development hacks, and new ideas on how to do business.
The Week – If you struggle to keep up with the news, this publication is a lifesaver. They publish email newsletters, blog posts and a print magazine featuring news summaries so you can keep up with current events without having to spend a ton of time watching or reading the news.
The Smithsonian – If you are a science nerd like I am, I highly recommend subscribing to this magazine. It features articles on the latest scientific discoveries, historical findings, cultural phenomena etc. You’ll always find an interesting fact/story to share in conversations.
#2 Read Interesting Books
I make it my goal to read at least one book a month. Books are loaded with interesting stories and information that is detailed enough to stimulate in-depth conversations and create bonds if you’ve read the same book or author as someone else.
If you want to join me, watch for our Science of People book club posts. At the end of every month, I share an article with my favorite lessons from the book.
In the meantime, here are a couple of my favorite conversation starter books:
Smartcuts by Shane Snow – This is an awesome book about hacking business advice and has lots of great stories and ideas that you can bring up during conversations at networking events or with colleagues.
59 Seconds by Richard Wiseman – This book is explains many of the bizarre psychological concepts that drive human behavior. You can find an idea for just about any conversation in that book.
Captivate – I’m admittedly biased toward this one because it is my latest book, but it’s stocked full of stories, fun facts and tips on how to have better conversations.
How to Win Friends and Influence People by Dale Carnegie – This book is timeless and a must-read if you want to have stronger interactions with people. It’s one of the books that got me started in my career and all of the advice in it still holds true today.
You can also check out our list: The 10 Books that Stimulate the Best Conversations
Don’t have time to read? Try listening to audiobooks instead. That way you can learn new ideas on your commute, while doing chores or any other time you can have earbuds in.
#3 Ask Interesting Questions
Conversations are a two-way interaction so what you ask is just as important as what you say. Instead of asking the same boring questions that everyone asks like “What do you do?” and “Where are you from?” liven up your conversations with questions that are thought-provoking and ignite people’s passions.
Check out my 33 favorite conversations starters.

The formula for fascinating conversation
How to walk into a room full of strangers and make a killer first impression
Our strategy for hacking the people code–we call it the matrix (Keanu Reeves not included with each book sale)
The art and science of understanding people
Learn the new–science based way for winning friends and influencing people.Do you know what the worst kind of relationship is?
Not difficult people.
Not enablers.
Not toxic people.
Nope.
Ambivalent relationships cause the most emotional strain, take the most energy and are the most toxic.
But what is an ambivalent relationship? Here are some questions to self-diagnose your ambivalent relationships. Answer each question by placing someone on the ambivalence spectrum.
Does this person support you or undermine you?
a) They are supportive
b) They are sometimes supportive
c) It depends
d) They undermine me
a) Fun!
b) Sometimes it’s fun
c) It depends
d) Not usually
Is this relationship healthy for you and your life??
a) Yes, it is healthy
b) Sometimes it’s healthy
c) It depends
d) It’s not usually healthy
Are you sure of your relationship with them?
a) I know exactly where we stand
b) Sometimes I know where we stand
c) It depends
d) I don’t usually know where we stand
Is this person usually excited for you or jealous of you?
a) They are excited for me
b) Sometimes they are excited for me
c) It depends
d) They can usually be jealous of me
Answer Key:
If you picked mostly A’s and B’s this person is a good friend!
If you picked mostly B’s and C’s you have an AMBIVALENT person in your life! Read on…
If you picked mostly C’s and D’s you have a TOXIC person in your life. Read How to Deal With Toxic People
The Science of Ambivalence
You might not realize it, but ambivalent relationships are more toxic than toxic ones. Wait what? I know what you’re thinking, but let me explain:
This is some serious science: Psychologist Bert Uchino found that the more ambivalent relationships you have, the more likely you are to have higher rates of depression, stress and dissatisfaction in your life.
A researcher at the University of Minnesota named Michelle Duffy wanted to see if frenemies impacted people in the workplace. And not just any workers—police officers. Here’s what she did:
Surveyed police officers on their levels of stress, absences from work and how often they were undermined and supported by their closest coworker
Unsurprisingly, she found the more an officer felt undermined, the more unauthorized breaks they took, the more absent they were from work and the less committed they were to their jobs.
But here’s where it gets interesting…
What about officers who had colleagues who were sometimes supportive?
These officers missed even more work, took even more breaks and felt even less committed.
You read that right: Officers were impacted more negatively when they had ambivalent relationships—even more than toxic ones?
Why Ambivalence is Toxic:
Duffy argued that when police officers have toxic relationships they can work to keep clear of them, they don’t worry or wonder as much and take as many steps to distance themselves as possible.
But ambivalent relationships were more confusing. It made police officers have to constantly second guess, be on guard and grapple with wondering and worrying.
We know we have to get rid of toxic relationships. We worry, grapple and second-guess ambivalent ones.
This effects all areas of our life. In another study, adults rated their relationships with the ten most important people in their lives. They also did two anxiety-provoking tasks:
Deliver a speech with little time to prep
Take a rapid fire math test
The more ambivalent relationships a person had, the more their heart rates spiked on both tasks.
Bottom Line: Ambivalent relationships stress you out in all areas of your life.
And they can be the most insidious because you don’t always know how to handle them. For example, toxic people usually show their toxicity with deal breakers, red flags and terrible aha moments:
Or…
Ambivalent relationships aren’t as obvious. A frenemy is the ultimate ambivalent relationship.
Frenemy: n A person with whom one is friendly despite a fundamental dislike or rivalry. Combination of friend + enemy.
I think there are three types…I also included some of my frenemies. I debated including them, but would always rather be honest and give you real examples. Be kind = )
#1: The Jealous Frenemy
This is the most common type of frenemy—in fact jealous is often the emotion that flips friends into enemies. And it goes both ways…
A colleague is jealous of a promotion.
You are jealous of a colleague’s promotion.
A wingman is jealous of your righteous ability to attract babes.
You are jealous of your wingman’s righteous ability to attract babes.
Someone is jealous of your raise / hair / smarts / personality / humor / car / ____.
You are jealous of someone’s raise / hair / smarts / personality / humor / car / ____.
The Problem: Jealous is an insidious little beast. It destroys trust, respect and admiration. I believe that it is almost impossible to have a healthy relationship where there is jealousy brewing.
Bottom Line: Either get over the jealousy, or get over the person.
My Frenemy: Oh there was this girl in High School who seemed to have it all. She was cool and fun and spontaneous (the word every guy said he loved about her). I see her on Facebook and her life looks perfect. I like her posts and we are ‘friends’ on Facebook. But I have to admit, I am jealous. I’m sure it’s not actually this way, but she makes her life look so easy and amazing and golden!
#2: The Undermining Frenemy
When you have an undermining frenemy you are constantly faced with challenges like this:
You landed a new client! Should you tell them?
You lost 5 pounds! Will they enable bad behavior if you go out to lunch?
You want to invite some new friends over. Should you invite them?
Undermining frenemies are usually great at passive aggressive comments, sarcastic tones and enabling your bad behavior.
My Frenemy: A frenemy of mine runs a podcast and a lifestyle blog. He is always offering support and frequently calls to chat through business stuff. I always wonder—is he borrowing my ideas or taking them? When he brought me on his podcast he asked really hard (borderline mean) questions. Was he trying to actually be supportive and encouraging or was he actually undermining me?
The Problem: These kinds of frenemies are the worst! Why? You hope they will be supportive, but they often aren’t.
Bottom Line: Fool me once, shame on you. Fool me twice, shame on me. Don’t keep hoping. Cut this person out.
#3: The Unsure Frenemy
Humans hate having unfinished business. We also hate not knowing where we stand with someone.
I think he is a close friend…but is he close friends with everyone?
I think she likes me?
Are we business friends or actual friends?
He knows me but I’m not sure if we are just acquaintances or actual contacts.
Are we LinkedIn type contacts or Facebook type contacts?
My Frenemy: One of my best friend’s best friends perplexes me. I am not really sure if she likes me or just is nice to me because we have a mutual friend. Sometimes she makes comments that seem passive aggressive, she frequently double books our mutual friend when she knows we already have plans. There might be a little jealousy there too. Is it on purpose? Does she hate me or like me? I really have no idea.
The Problem: You just aren’t sure. Where do you stand? Do they help or support you? You are constantly on guard and second guessing them. This kind of ambivalence takes a lot of energy because you are in a constant state of not-knowing.
Bottom Line: Have a talk. Sort it out. Put it all out on the table.
Ambivalence Takes More Energy
With toxic relationships, we know we need to cut them out—and often do. Ambivalent relationships are much harder. But guessing, wondering, protecting—those all take a lot more energy. It might be time for you to:
It takes so much physical energy to be on guard.
My goal is to start owning my relationships.
Owning my jealousy—and facing it.
Standing my ground—and not pretending.
Speaking truth—and stating it all.
I hope you will too.
Frenemies are more toxic than enemies because we let them get away with so much more.
I say no longer.
Live in truth,

The formula for fascinating conversation
How to walk into a room full of strangers and make a killer first impression
What to do to increase your impact and income using people skills
Our strategy for hacking the people code–we call it the matrix (Keanu Reeves not included with each book sale)
The art and science of understanding people
Learn the new–science based way for winning friends and influencing people.We are all creative geniuses. It doesn’t matter if you’re a technical professional who values logic above all else or if you think you don’t have an ounce of artistic ability, you have creativity within you. The question is, do you have the courage to unveil it?
Research has found that the fear of standing out is a primary reason why people don’t come up with innovative solutions or express themselves creatively. However, by not sharing your original ideas with the world or engaging in activities that ignite your creativity, you’re missing out on a powerful source of fulfillment.
This month we chose Big Magic by Elizabeth Gilbert as our Science of People book to learn how we can incorporate the magic of creativity in our everyday lives.
Here are my favorite lessons from the book:
Start With an End in Sight
The fatal flaw of many creative people is that they never complete their projects. No matter how much progress they make, they always find new things to change or add as they strive for perfection.
Gilbert emphasizes that nothing you create will ever be perfect. Even if you think you’ve reached perfection, someone else could look at your creation and spot a dozen things wrong with it. That’s okay though because the goal of creative pursuits is to create not to perfect.
The key to overcoming perfectionism is to start every project with a strict deadline. According to Parkinson’s Law, people are inclined to use the maximum amount of time given to complete tasks. This is one of the key driving forces behind procrastination. You may start working in a slow, distracted state but as soon as the deadline approaches, you kick things into gear.
If you’re engaging in creative pursuits for fun or to learn a new skill and have nothing driving you to meet a deadline, you can make your deadlines days that you plan to share your work with a friend or family member. Tell them what you’re doing so they can hold you accountable.
Do You Love it Through the Pain?
When you’re creating something new, you’re bound to face plenty of obstacles. The true test of whether or not you’re pursuing the right type of creative endeavor is if you still feel passionate about it during times of self-doubt, frustration, and failure.
In the book, Gilbert describes how through her years of struggling to become a successful writer, she never lost her passion for the craft. Writing is a part of who she is and no amount of difficulties will change that. If you’re pursuing the right creative pursuit, you’ll feel the same.
Watch Elizabeth Gilbert’s TED talk for more about how she stayed inspired through her failures:
That being said, living a creative life isn’t all about the trials. The joy of creating should far outweigh the difficulties.
Flirt with Your Creativity
One of the secrets to building a positive relationship with your creativity is to flirt with it and take it on dates. This may sound a bit odd, but there are a surprising amount of similarities between dating and being creative. They both involve taking risks and being vulnerable, they’re emotional, they inspire you to engage in new experiences and may reveal personal qualities you never knew you had.
Here are a couple of fun date ideas to ignite your creative sparks:
Spend the afternoon drinking coffee in a quirky, local cafe. Use the time to explore new ideas.
Turn off all your notifications for a quiet evening immersed in one of your creative projects.
When you need a large block of time with your creativity, escape for a weekend getaway. A change of scenery can do worlds of wonders for large projects.
Not only is dating your creativity relaxing, it also makes you more creative. Researchers at the University of Cambridge discovered that people think more creatively when they play with their ideas in low-stress environments.
Don’t Quit Your Day Job
Throughout Big Magic, Gilbert debunks the dangerous myth that to live creatively, you have to become a full-time artist who risks everything else in life to invest in your art. While there are plenty of people whom that works for, it ignores the fact that you can have a full-time job, stable relationships, be involved in other activities and still be highly creative.
The key is to make being creative a part of your everyday life. Here a couple of easy ways to fit creativity into your schedule:
Use the time you’d normally spend on social media and/or watching TV to work on creative projects.
Block off time when you first wake up or before you go bed as your creative time.
Invite your friends to join you in taking classes or otherwise engage in your creative hobbies to make it a bonding experience.
Do you want to earn a living off of your creative projects? Check out our article on How to Transform Your Passion into a Side Hustle for tips on how to get started.
Want to dig deeper into the science of creativity? Check out our book Captivate

By Vanessa Van Edwards
Science of People
Overview:
The goal of our lab, Science of People, is to find patterns in human behavior. We recently examined presidential inaugural addresses.
What patterns can be found in the last 20 presidential Inaugural addresses? Are there differences in body language, verbal patterns and persuasiveness? The answers might surprise you. We answer the following questions:
Which president used the most hand gestures?
Which president smiled the most? The least?
Which party uses more negative language?
Which president told the most stories in his address? The least?
Who spoke the longest? The shortest?
Which president cited the most data? The least?
What are the most popular tie colors?
Which party is more individualistic (uses more I, Me, My) versus the party that is more community centric (uses more Us, We, Our)?
Which president used the most alpha body language? The least?
Which party uses the most emotional language?
Who had the best weather?
Every president except one wore black suits. Who wore grey?
This report outlines the patterns in the last 20 presidential inaugural addresses.
Scope:
This analysis examines the verbal and nonverbal patterns all of the 20 presidential inaugural addresses given since Harry Truman’s in 1949.
We compared 11 addresses given by Republican presidents and 9 addresses by Democratic presidents.
The analysis also includes historical patterns. In the cases where a president was elected for a 2nd term and gave a 2nd inaugural address, the scores in each metric represent an average of that president’s two addresses.
Metrics:
We analyzed these addresses on a total of 13 different metrics divided into 3 categories:
The coders in our human behavior research lab analyzed the following categories.
Amount of hand gestures
Number of smiles
Frequency of alpha body language or pride posing
Context Patterns:
We also looked at some contextual cues to see if there were any interesting patterns. We examined the following:
Clothing colors
Weather
Speech length
Verbal Patterns:
We partnered with Quantified Communications to use their communication measurement platform to analyze the transcript of each speech.
Emotional language
Sharing of data and numbers
Negative and positive language
Use of personal vs. impersonal pronouns: “I” language vs “We” language
Storytelling
Trustworthy language
Clarity
A Note on Quantified Communications’ Data: With the exception of the pronoun category, the research-validated algorithms used to score each metric are composed of several linguistic attributes proven to measure that particular element of communication effectiveness. QC uses natural language processing to measure each communication, then index the raw scores in each metric against millions of data points in their global communication database. The % scores in each metric reflect how that speaker performs compared to the average communicator in that database.
The Puzzle:
We like to believe we pick Presidents based on the issues, but do we really? According to the American Psychological Association[i] 27% of American voters claim they vote for presidential candidates primarily based on the nominee’s character and moral values.
We tend to guess at someone’s character, personality and moral compass by observing their body language and analyzing verbal cues[ii]. The question is: What cues are being sent during a Presidential inaugural address? And what does this say about the President and his party?
Key Findings:
Here are our key findings in each metric with historical patterns and party differences.
#1: Hand Gestures
Hand[iii] gestures are an important mark of charisma for political candidates. We marked both amount of hand gestures as well as specific emblems. Presidents most frequently use the thumbs up gesture, the point and the open palm.
Donald Trump used the most hand gestures—641 in just 17 minutes!
Ronald Reagan and Jimmy Carter relied to heavily on their podium and used none.
#2: Smiling
Smiling can be a signal of optimism, warmth and openness. Which president smiled the most? And which is the happier partier? Based on smiles, here’s what we found:
Barack Obama (second term) and George Bush smiled the most!
What’s interesting is every president smiled more in their second term inaugural address than their first—maybe they get more relaxed the second time around.
John F. Kennedy and Harry S. Truman smiled the least.
Republicans smiled more—but not by much!
#3: Pride Posing
Researchers from the University of British Columbia[i] found that winning athletes use broad, expansive gestures. We coded presidential candidates on their alpha body language – or expansive gestures. Here’s who posed the most:
Donald Trump: Showed pride 20 times.
Barack Obama (Second Term) Showed pride 8 times.
Overall Republicans use slightly more pride gestures than Democrats.
Psychologists[i] have also surveyed 846 academic historians, and found that achievement-striving presidents do best in office. “Achievement-striving means people have high goals, but more importantly, they work hard to achieve them,” says the author. “They stay focused; they are kind of workaholics.”[ii] In other words, we like presidents who strive to be winners. Pride posing can be an indication of an achievement striving president.
Want even more on the science of nonverbal and how it influences our perceptions? Check out our book, Captivate!
#4: Clothing Colors
We were curious about tie color, shirt color and suit color. The shirt color data was a dud—every president in this sample wore a white shirt. But here is the breakdown of tie color:
BOTH Republicans and Democrats wore blue and red—looks like most candidates don’t stick to their party color.
Every president wore a black suit except one…Dwight D. Eisenhower:
#5: Weather
We were curious about who had the best and worst weather days. Here’s who had bad luck:
#6: Speech Length
Who spoke the longest? And which party is the wordiest?
The shortest inaugural address in the last 20 presidents was Gerald Ford at 8 minutes—surprisingly he also had the best weather! Too bad he didn’t use it.
The longest speeches were Harry S. Truman at 22 minutes and George W. Bush (second term) at 21 minutes.
#7: Emotional Language
Emotionally charged language, imagery, and metaphors activate audiences’ emotions to help them feel personally invested in the message.
George W. Bush used the most emotion in his inaugural addresses, while President Johnson used the least.
Republican presidents use 9.5% more emotion than Democratic presidents during their inaugural addresses.
A great example of emotional language is by George W. Bush:
“By our efforts we have lit a fire as well; a fire in the minds of men. It warms those who feel its power. It burns those who fight its progress. And one day this untamed fire of freedom will reach the darkest corners of our world.”
-George W. Bush, 2nd Inaugural Address, 2005
#8: Sharing of Data and Numbers
Some presidents appeal to logic more than others. Speaking with logic is when a president uses language establishing research and proof or cites data and statistics to support their arguments.
President Harry S. Truman used the most logic in his inaugural address, while President Barack Obama used the least.
Republican presidents use 3.2% less logic than Democratic presidents during their inaugural addresses.
“We are ready to undertake new projects to strengthen a free world. In the coming years, our program for peace and freedom will emphasize four major courses of action. […] On the basis of these four major courses of action we hope to help create the conditions that will lead eventually to personal freedom and happiness for all mankind.”
-Harry Truman, Inaugural Address, 1949
#9: Negative and Positive Language
The use of negative or positive language in an address can indicate a president’s perspective.
President John F. Kennedy used the most negative language in his inaugural address; President George Bush Sr., the least.
President Eisenhower used the most positive language in his inaugural addresses; President Johnson used the least.
Republican presidents use 10.6% less negative language than Democratic presidents during their inaugural addresses.
Republican presidents ALSO use 8.4% more positive language. Looks like the Democrats tend to sway more negative to neutral in their speeches.
“To those people in the huts and villages of half the globe struggling to break the bonds of mass misery…Finally, to those nations who would make themselves our adversary, we offer not a pledge but a request: that both sides begin anew the quest for peace, before the dark powers of destruction unleashed by science engulf all humanity in planned or accidental self-destruction.”
“In the light of this equality, we know that the virtues most cherished by free people — love of truth, pride of work, devotion to country — all are treasures equally precious in the lives of the most humble and of the most exalted. The men who mine coal and fire furnaces, and balance ledgers, and turn lathes, and pick cotton, and heal the sick and plant corn — all serve as proudly and as profitably for America as the statesmen who draft treaties and the legislators who enact laws.”
-Dwight Eisenhower, 1st Inaugural Address, 1953
We also found that almost every single president used more positive language in his second term address – the same happened with increased smiling in second term speeches.
Presidents definitely feel more optimistic going into their second term—at least that is how they come across.
#10: “I” Language vs. “We” Language
Which presidents use more I, me and my. Which presidents use more we, our, us?
President Lyndon B. Johnson used the most “I” language in his inaugural address, while President Obama used the least.
President Jimmy Carter used the most “we” language in his inaugural address, while President Harry S. Truman used the least.
Republican presidents use 18.0% more “I” language than Democratic presidents during their inaugural addresses.
Republican presidents use 6.3% less “we” language than Democratic presidents during their inaugural addresses.
This again points to the idea that Republicans tend to emphasize the individual, where Democrats tend to focus on fostering more community.
“For more than 30 years that I have served this nation I have believed that this injustice to our people, this waste of our resources, was our real enemy. For 30 years or more, with the resources I have had, I have vigilantly fought against it. I have learned and I know that it will not surrender easily.”
And example of high 3rd person pronoun use:
“We cannot dwell upon remembered glory. We cannot afford to drift. We reject the prospect of failure or mediocrity or an inferior quality of life for any person. Our Government must at the same time be both competent and compassionate. We have already found a high degree of personal liberty, and we are now struggling to enhance equality of opportunity. Our commitment to human rights must be absolute, our laws fair, our national beauty preserved.”
Storytelling can be a very persuasive way of speaking—which appeals to a broader audience then just using logic or data. It is also a more emotional appeal to listeners than statistics alone. How did the presidents compare?
President Lyndon B. Johnson used the most storytelling language in his inaugural addresses, while President Harry S. Truman used the least.
Remember Harry S. Truman also used the most logic—data and statistics. Clearly, he did this in lieu of stories.
Republican presidents use only 1.5% less storytelling language than Democratic presidents during their inaugural addresses.
A storytelling example:
“For every generation there is a destiny. For some, history decides. For this generation the choice must be our own. Even now, a rocket moves toward Mars. It reminds us that the world will not be the same for our children, or even for ourselves in a short span of years. The next man to stand here will look out on a scene that is different from our own.”
Quantified Communications defines trustworthy language as “The linguistic patterns in a speech or written document that are proven to inspire audiences to trust the communicator.” They have found that the language patterns that can help speakers gain trust include insights behind stated goals, directness of language, demonstrated accountability, and a balanced emotional tone.
President Jimmy Carter used the most trustworthy language in his inaugural addresses, while President Harry S. Truman used the least.
Republican presidents use 3.0% less trustworthy language than Democratic presidents during their inaugural addresses.
An example of trustworthy language:
“I have no new dream to set forth today, but rather urge a fresh faith in the old dream. […] You have given me a great responsibility — to stay close to you, to be worthy of you, and to exemplify what you are. Let us create together a new national spirit of unity and trust. Your strength can compensate for my weakness, and your wisdom can help to minimize my mistakes.”
#13: Clarity
A speakers’ clarity is how easy it is to follow and understand their content.
President Bush, Sr. used the clearest language in his inaugural address, while President Harry S. Truman used the least.
Republican presidents use 9.2% clearer language than Democratic presidents during their inaugural addresses.
An example of clear language comes from President Bush Sr.
“We know what works: Freedom works. We know what’s right: Freedom is right. We know how to secure a more just and prosperous life for man on Earth: through free markets, free speech, free elections, and the exercise of free will unhampered by the state.”
Summary:
It is clear that there are patterns between the parties—Republicans tend to use more emotional language, more stories and intense words (both positive and negative). Democrats love data and logic—they are more likely to use neutral language.
Our most nonverbally expressive presidents have also been our more recent ones–Donald Trump and Barack Obama smiled and used the most hand gestures.
Some findings surprised us, especially presidents who used more negative language and data. Many viewers believed Donald Trump’s inauguration was one of the most negative we have heard in recent years. And here is where there is a special wrinkle in the data. Use of negative language was measured by frequency not degree. Trump might have had less negative language overall, but when he was negative, he did not hold back.
Our next steps will be to look at any correlations between starting approval rating and inaugural address patterns. Let’s see what we find next!
To download the PDF version of this insight article, simply enter your name and email below for instant access:
Researchers:
Vanessa Van Edwards is a behavioral investigator and published author. She figures out the science of what makes people tick at her human behavior research lab, the Science of People. As a geeky, modern-day Dale Carnegie, her innovative work has been featured on NPR, Business Week and CNN.
Quantified Communications is our analytics partner. The QC platform, built on years of scientific apommunication research, uses a combination of natural language processing, automated vocal analysis, and insights from a panel of Ph.D.-level communication experts to help the leaders across the globe measure and improve their communication. QC’s work has been featured on WSJ, Business Insider, Forbes, and the TED mainstage.
Do you ever ask for advice? If not, you should. Asking for advice is one of my favorite, most-overlooked people hacks because it helps you learn new things and bond with people. Check out my video to find out how:
Advice is powerful and I want to hear yours.
Right now, I’m trying to grow my Youtube channel. Is there anything that we should do more of? I would be so grateful if you tweet me your ideas @Vvanedwards.
Keep reading for more tips on how to strengthen bonds by asking for advice.
The Franklin Effect
While we typically only ask for advice from the people closest to us, there is immense value in asking advice from people whom we want to get closer to. The bonding power of asking someone for help is so great that you can use it to turn an enemy into a friend.
This is known as the Franklin Effect. It states that when you ask someone for help it makes them like you and want to help you more. Benjamin Franklin came up with this theory as he struggled to deal with a rival senator who he couldn’t get along with. When he heard that his rival was a passionate reader and had a rare book that he was interested in reading, he asked him for the book, read it, and returned it with a sincere note expressing his appreciation for letting him borrow it. Following that, the two became close friends.
Even though asking to borrow the book was a simple request, it did two important things:
It showed that Franklin had something in common with his rival. Likewise, when you ask for advice, you point out a shared interest with the other person.
It put Franklin’s rival in a position to help him. As social creatures, we feel good when we help others and those positive feelings establish a bond.
The Franklin Effect proves that asking someone about a topic they care about can transform your relationship with them.
Get the Most Out of Your Requests for Advice
Asking for advice isn’t difficult, but there are some things you should keep in mind to elicit the best possible response.
#1 Make it Personal
To maximize the bonding power of your request, tell people why you chose them to ask for advice from. The more context you can add to your request the better.
Here are some examples:
They have a leadership style you admire.
They’ve accomplished something you are trying to achieve.
In the past their insights have helped you through difficult situations.
Including the reason why you want their advice allows you to begin your request with a compliment and shows that you value their opinion.
#2 Ask Something Specific
Though people are usually more than happy to offer advice, they are also busy and don’t have time to waste answering vague, confusing questions. Before asking for advice, keep these rules in mind:
Don’t ask for general advice.
Don’t ask to pick someone’s brain.
Don’t ask about a hypothetical situation.
People are much more likely to give you the advice you need if you target something specific. Here are some examples of specific questions that you can adapt for your situation:
How would you approach dealing with [specific problem you are struggling with]?
I’m struggling with [insert struggle], and I think [idea] might be a solution. What do you think?
I recieved [description of difficult message], do you have any advice on how I should respond?
#3 Express Your Gratitude
After someone gives you advice, thank them for their valuable insights and tell them how you plan on implementing their advice. People often forget about the second part but it is crucial for relationship-building because it shows that you value their time and expertise.
#4 Follow-Up With Actions
After acting on someone’s advice, let them know how well it worked. Doing so gives them a sense of pride in your accomplishment and allows both of you to bond over your success.
If their advice didn’t work, follow-up thanking them for their insights again and share with them what you learned from the experience of their advice not working or just the outcome of your situation so they know how it turned out.
This is just the start! If you want to learn more human behavior hacks check out my book Captivate

Have you ever had a conversation with someone where they gave you vague responses and you suspected their actual thoughts were stronger than they said? It’s a frustrating situation to be in but one that is easily solved when you know how to read faces. People’s faces often reveal far more than the words they say. Even when someone tries to appear calm and neutral, their faces will flicker brief expressions that reveal their true feelings.
A microexpression is a brief, involuntary facial expression that is shown on the face of humans according to the emotions that are being experienced. Unlike regular prolonged facial expressions, it is difficult to fake a microexpression.
Researchers have discovered seven universal microexpressions that every person, regardless of where they live in the world, displays.
Decoding the 7 Universal Microexpressions
The seven microexpressions correspond with emotions that drive human behavior. Here is a brief overview of each:
Anger – Being able to spot the anger microexpression is key for recognizing it in people who don’t feel comfortable vocalizing or acting on the feeling.
Contempt – This means hatred or disdain. It’s the most dangerous emotion because once people feel this way about someone or something, it tends to be permanent.
Disgust – In addition to being the default reaction to gross things, people also show disgust toward anything they think is morally wrong.
Fear – This microexpression is a sign that someone feels threatened and/or is confronted with uncertainty.
Happiness – Unlike the others, happiness is more significant when it’s not shown. Many people will fake happiness to be polite and/or hide their true emotions. The genuine happiness microexpression is characterized by engaged eye muscles as seen in the photo on the right.
Fake Happy Real Happy
Sadness – Many people are uncomfortable sharing their sadness with others. When you spot this expression, know that the individual is upset and may need space.
Surprise – This microexpression signals that someone was startled which can be both positive or negative. To understand how someone felt about the surprise, watch for the microexpressions that follow after.
How to React to Microexpressions
To harness the full power of reading microexpressions, you must respond to them with caution. Unlike with full emotional displays where people are conscious and accepting that they are showing an emotion, with microexpressions people typically believe they are hiding their emotions and will be startled, and at times offended, if you call them for their feelings. Instead, take an indirect approach that doesn’t disclose your face reading abilities. Here’s how:
First ask yourself, is this an emotion that needs to be addressed? If the emotion behind the microexpression is expected and/or acceptable for the conversation topic then it may be best to not acknowledge it. For example, if you’re cancelling plans with a friend and they tell you it’s okay but flash a sadness microexpression, the best solution is probably to ignore the expression and make it up to them later. Their expression is fitting because having plans cancelled can be upsetting. But, as your friend, making you feel guilty is worse and forcing them to explain their sadness will make the situation more emotional.
On the other hand, if you’re speaking to a colleague about a project you are collaborating on and they flash a fear microexpression, then you should investigate the source of the fear. In this case, the microexpression hints that there is a problem that could become more severe if left unresolved.
If, like the second example, a microexpression suggests that the individual you’re talking to is hiding something that needs to be resolved, redirect the flow of your conversation to focus more on what they or you were saying when they flashed the microexpression. Don’t call them out on the emotion directly. Instead, ask them how they feel about the subject or for them to explain what they were saying more in-depth.
Be aware that sometimes microexpressions are unrelated to the current conversation. We’re all guilty of letting our minds wander to other topics while talking to people and sometimes it can show on people’s faces. Sadness in particular may flash when someone is dealing with a personal issue that their thoughts are frequently drawn to. If after answering your questions for more details someone is still showing negative microexpressions, assume that they may be having a rough day. If you were talking about a serious issue, follow-up with them to see if they still appear emotional about the subject.
Want to learn more about microexpressions? Check out Lie Detection in 100 Minutes!
Do you know when someone is lying to you?
We like to think we are great at spotting lies—but on average we can only detect deception with about 54% accuracy. That’s barely better than chance!
I believe learning how to spot deception is a life skill.
We should all know how to have more honest interactions. We should all be able to protect ourselves from liars. We should all be able to decode hidden emotions.
That is what our new course is all about.
I want to teach you how to:
Improve your lie-spotting abilities to up to 90% accuracy
Decode hidden emotions
Increase the honesty of your interactions
Learn the secrets of body language
Here’s the best part. All it takes is 100 minutes.Do you think pick-up lines work? When I asked my twitter followers this question, only 30% of people responded with the affirmative. While I wasn’t surprised by this response, I do think that the negative reputation that pick-up lines have isn’t entirely earned.
Check out this video to find out why:
While people use plenty of pick-up lines that are awkward, confusing, and/or just flat-out inappropriate, they’re not supposed to be that way. By definition, a pick-up line is supposed to do two things:
Intrigue someone enough that they begin to reciprocate your interest.
Initiate a conversation.
In other words, a pick-up line is supposed to intriguing and captivating, not weird and offensive. When doing research for my book Captivate, I sought out the most effective ways to spark conversations and make great first impressions. I found that the mistake people make with pick-up lines and other ways of approaching people is that they forget to consider what the other person would be comfortable with.
Come Up with Pick-Up Lines that Work
The secret to coming up with pick-up lines that work is context. Usually when people think of pick-up lines they look to other person’s appearance for inspiration. This is what leads to a lot of the bad pick-up lines that people are used to hearing and that often come across as offensive.
Instead of looking at the other person, look to your surroundings when thinking of a conversation starter. Here are some examples:
If you’re at a friend’s party, ask them how they know the host.
If you’re at a bar and they order an interesting drink, ask them what it is.
If you’re at an event, ask them what brought them there or how they’ve liked the activities so far.
Think of coming up with a pick-up line like playing the game I Spy. Look around the room for something interesting and bring that up to someone around you.
If you struggle to approach new people because you have social anxiety and it makes you feel awkward, check out my book Captivate. In it, I provide step-by-step instructions on how to look and feel confident in social situations that trigger your nerves.
The Single Best Pick-Up Line Ever
Do you know what the most effective pick-up line is? Researchers at the University College London tested hundreds of pick-up lines ranging from sweet and cheesy to flat out sleazy and they found that the single best pick-up line for both men and women is:
Hello, how are you?
It’s really that simple! That question works because it’s easy for the other person to answer, it’s appropriate, it’s non-invasive and it shows you’re interested in hearing about them.
Once you’ve got the conversation started the other person is interested in engaging with you, you can move onto more personal topics. Here are a few of my favorite questions to ask when getting to know someone new:
What does a typical day look like for you? This is a great question to ask to learn about their lifestyle.
Have you watched any good movies/read any good books/listened to any good music lately? Learn their taste in entertainment and see if you have anything in common.
Given the choice of anyone in the world, whom would you want as a dinner guest? You’ll get to hear about who they admire and what types of conversations they like to have.
What’s your favorite way to spend a weekend? Find out how they like to have fun and get potential date ideas.
Would you like to be famous? In what way? An easy question to ask to learn both their goals and what drives them.

The formula for fascinating conversation
How to walk into a room full of strangers and make a killer first impression
Our strategy for hacking the people code–we call it the matrix (Keanu Reeves not included with each book sale)
Learn the new–science based way for winning friends and influencing people.Think your profile picture doesn’t matter? Think again! Research has found that people make their first impression of you within 100ms of seeing your photo! Here’s what’s crazy:
Different photos of you send different messages.
Princeton University Researcher, Dr. Alexander Todorov found that different images of the same person can create drastically different first impressions. The researchers took slightly different pictures of the same person and asked participants to rate them for various characteristics, like intelligence, trustworthiness and attractiveness. Each pose got different ratings. The question is:
What is your profile picture saying?
We decided to do an experiment to figure out what makes a good profile picture. Using photos from the dating website HotorNot.com, we coded hundreds of pictures looking for patterns between the highest rated and lowest rated photos.
8 Ways to Make Your Profile Picture More Attractive:
Our first impressions are essential, and more and more they are happening online. Your profile picture is your introduction to a new connection. Some of these results surprised us—things we thought mattered don’t really and others we don’t even think about do! And of course, we also confirmed some clichés.
Here’s how to put your best selfie forward.
#1: Skin or no skin?
Are you ready for this? Even though men get a bad rap for wanting to see skin, women actually were more interested in men who showed off! Yup, women like it hot and steamy! Cleavage, short skirts, lots of skin did not make a difference between low and high-ranking women. However, men really benefited from showing off their skin. High-ranking men tended to show off their chest and go shirtless more than low ranking men. Flexing didn’t hurt either.
#2: Don’t Hide
Want to show you’re available and open to a relationship? Then be open and show yourself. Photos with hats and glasses were a total buzz kill for the hot factor. Sunglasses were especially detrimental. This is most likely because we use eye gaze to build connection. When we make eye contact with someone (even in a picture) our body produces the hormone Oxytocin, which makes us feel connected to someone. When raters can’t see eyes, they don’t get the hormonal boost for connection.
Funny Note: While hats and glasses weren’t great, headphones didn’t seem to effect ratings at all.
#3: Front Me
Ever wonder how you should face the camera? The results are in—we find it more attractive when people fully face the camera. This is especially important for men. Why? Fronting is a nonverbal sign of respect. When you are really engaged with someone you align your entire body with theirs—head-to-head, torso-to-torso and toe-to-toe. In photos, when we are trying to gauge how attentive someone might be as a mate or how much they would respect us, fronting gives us a subconscious cue. Without realizing it, we think people who angle towards the camera are also angling towards us, this makes us see them as more in tune with us.
Bonus: In my book Captivate, I dive even deeper into body language, first impressions and how to project confidence in every interaction.
#4: Context Matters
Think your hotness is only about you? Think again! The hottest photos also tended to have some kind of background story—hiking, beach trip, travel, cooking, driving. Photos that included some kind of activity added to the hotness of both men and women.
Trophies: We also counted what we call ‘trophies’ these are objects that people put on display in their photo in addition to themselves. Men’s favorite objects were guitars, cars, motorcycles and guns. Although none of these impacted hotness scores. Sorry guys, not all women are impressed by a guitar.
#5: To Smile or Not to Smile?
The biggest question we get around profile pictures is to smile or not. The answer might surprise you:
For women closed mouth smiles were worst. The lowest ranking women used the closed mouth smile. High-ranking women had either a full smile or a neutral face. So, if you’re going to smile, go big.
For men, surprisingly, neutral faces tended to do best. High-ranking men had serious or still faces (often looking off into the sunset) and those seemed to do better than low-ranking men who smiled wide.
Bonus: Want to learn even more about smiles and other expressions? Check out my book Captivate where I explore how to decode anyone you meet.
#6: Get Handsy
Ever wondered if you should show your hands in your picture? If you’re a woman the answer is YES! Half of the high-ranking women had their hands visible in their photo, while only a third of low-ranking women did. Hands are our nonverbal trust indicators. It seems that when men are rating women on attractiveness they are also factoring in trustworthiness and visible hands is a positive indicator of trust.
#7: The Monroe Gaze
Marilyn Monroe was famous for her flirty head tilt and sultry stare. Our coder noticed that many of the high-ranking women used the Monroe Gaze in their photos. This seems to be a hallmark of ‘hot’ women. A Monroe Gaze is when a woman tilts her head, looks up through her lashes, hoods her eyes, pouts her lips and sometimes exposes her neck. This is a very flirtatious gesture because it looks very similar to what a woman does when she is experiencing physical pleasure. Exposing her neck also releases pheromones.
Remember Lola Bunny?
Notice how even in action she shows the Monroe Gaze—tilted head, low eyes, exposed neck:
Or how about Jessica Rabbit who almost rests in the Monroe Gaze during her scenes:
#8: What Color is Best?
What’s the best color to wear in your profile picture? Confidence is the best color in your closet. We looked at colors in both male and female shots and found no significant difference between high and low ranking women and men. However, confident poses were markedly different for both high and low ranking women. Attractiveness is as much about attitude as appearance.
I hope this fun research experiment has shed some light on what goes into attractive profile pictures. Luckily, our appeal is about attitude. In your photos you want to show trustworthiness, confidence and openness—this is what makes you truly attractive.
Researchers:
Vanessa Van Edwards is a behavioral investigator and published author. She figures out the science of what makes people tick at her human behavior research lab, the Science of People. As a geeky, modern-day Dale Carnegie, her innovative work has been featured on NPR, Business Week and CNN.
Jose Piña is a certified Body Language Trainer and researcher with the Science of People lab. One of his favorite topics is the face and microexpressions. Decoding the face is a fascinating task just like learning the cues that help your impression and personality. All experiments are executed with the ambition to find out how and why do humans function and how the results can benefit you.
This is just the start! If you want to learn more human behavior hacks check out my book Captivate


Interpersonal intelligence is one of the most overlooked, underutilized skill sets. In school, as we form our careers or level-up our professional life we often think about technical skills. We forget about soft skills. I believe people skills should not be optional.
When you have exceptional people skills, everything becomes easier.
You are able to:
Negotiate for more money
Make friends easily
Engage in non-awkward conversations
Say no to toxic people
Bond quickly with clients
Get along with colleagues
Detect lies
Fight less with your partner
Understand the people in your life
As a human behavior investigator, I study the hidden forces that drive our behavior patterns in my lab—the Science of People. Over the past decade, I’ve developed shortcuts, formulas, and blueprints for getting along with anyone.
The Essential People Skills:
Today I want to dive into 5 essential people skills that every one of us should use on a daily basis. They are my secret weapons for interaction.
#1: Infect Excitement
It might sound crazy, but our emotions are contagious (citation 1). We are spreading our moods all the time–even from what we post on Facebook. One study (citation 2) analyzed over a billion anonymized status updates from 100 million users. They found that positive creates an upward spiral of more positive posts. Whereas even one negative post creates a downward spiral of more negative posts.
Here’s the good news: The positive posts were more influential and more contagious.
This happens both online and offline. In one study published in the British Psychological Society (citation 3) they found that when you share positive news with a friend it helps you BOTH. Your happiness increases and so does theirs.
Action Step:
Try to infect excitement with the people around you. Share the big news, but also share the small news. Love your vanilla latte? Share that frothy goodness on Insta!
Before meeting a friend think about all the good news you can share. Think of funny stories, juicy updates and something you can toast together. There is nothing better than a good champagne toast.
#2: Avoid Dreamkillers
Ok, so let’s say you take the advice from People Skill #1 and you share some super exciting news with a friend. Then their reaction is…a little lackluster, kinda neutral or worse a little jealous.
I believe sharing excitement is both an awesome people skill and a people test.
If you share a piece of exciting news and the person you are with gets really excited with you and for you–bingo, this is a great connection. If you share a piece of exciting news and the person you are with doesn’t respond well–alert, alert, alert! This might not be a great connection. I call these people dreamkillers.
Dreamkiller n
A person who shuts down excitement, passion and joy in others because they are jealous, disengaged or poopy.
Life is too short to surround ourselves with people who don’t truly support us. When you find a dreamkiller, weed them out immediately. These people are toxic! Here are other kinds of toxic people you might want to watch out for:
#3: Add, Don’t Subtract
Oh man, now I have something difficult to ask you. Are you a dreamkiller? Sometimes we dreamkill without realizing it.
In an interaction you are either adding to it–building excitement, laughing at jokes, asking questions.
Or you are subtracting from it–being cynical, disengaging or not asking reciprocal questions.
Subtracting are all small dreamkillers. And they can be hurtful and stunt relationship growth if done too often. Here are the ways we dreamkill without realizing it:
Being a wet blanket. Your friend’s going to Mexico, but you point out the Zika outbreak. Your Mom got a new sweater, but you tell her it’s the wrong color. Your colleague lost weight, but you point out her new jowls. Stop putting a damper on people’s excitement! Don’t be a buzzkill.
Not playing catch. You know when someone asks you, “How was your week?” And then you answer, but don’t ask back. Ya, that sucks. Ask questions back! Be curious! Play catch when someone throws you the ball, don’t run away with it like the Beast in Sandlot.
Being a downer. There was traffic. I couldn’t find parking. This wine is terrible. This food is expensive. Ya, we get it life is tough. If you are in a bad mood, stay home and eat ice cream! Come out to juice people up, not to bring people down.
#4: Decode Hidden Emotions
Sometimes we don’t share how we are truly feeling–very highly socially intelligent people know how to suss out what’s happening behind the words. Dr. Paul Ekman discovered 7 Universal Facial Expressions–called microexpressions. Once you learn how to spot them you can learn a lot about what someone is really thinking. The most important one for you to spot is contempt.
It is simply a one-sided mouth raise. The problem is that we think of a smirk as partial happiness or boredom–but that could not be farther from the truth! Contempt is an expression of disdain, pessimism and scorn.
Make sure you are not accidentally showing it in your profile picture!
If you see it on someone’s face, be sure to get to the root cause. What is causing that negativity? Make sure it’s not you!
Learn all 7 of the microexpressions in my latest book Captivate: Use Science to Succeed with People. Our entire Chapter 6 is an overview of the microexpressions and how to spot them.
#5: Stop People Pleasing
Being ‘good with people’ does not mean saying yes to everything. Many of us confuse superior people skills with flattery and people pleasing. This is the farthest thing from the truth! You have to be able to say no to the wrong people so you have energy to interact with the right ones.
Anti-people pleasing is an incredibly important people skill. It involves:
Setting up boundaries
Saying no
Eliminating toxic people
Don’t feel like you always have to say yes. Don’t be pressured into appeasing people just because you feel like you should. I believe high interpersonal intelligence comes from taking control of your interactions.
Bring control back into your social life:
Infect excitement with people you care about
Avoid dreamkillers
Don’t be a dreamkiller–add to all of your interactions
Decode hidden emotions in the people you meet (and watch out for contempt!)
Stop people pleasing, it won’t win you the right kind of friends.
Want more like this? Want to really elevate your people skills? Check out the trailer for Captivate: Use Science to Succeed with People
When you understand the laws of human behavior you can get along with anyone and your influence, impact and income will increase as a result. What’s more, you will improve your interpersonal intelligence, make a killer first impression and build rapport quickly and authentically in any situation—negotiations, interviews, parties and pitches. You will never interact in the same way again.
In Captivate, you will learn:
The Social Game Plan: Every party, networking event and social situation has a predictable map – discover how to work a room and the sweet spot for making the most connections. (Hack #1)
The Death of Small Talk: All conversations can be hacked—if you know how certain words generate dopamine in the people you meet. (Hack #3)
The Triple Threat: What’s the social equivalent of being a superstar? I’ll tell you it has nothing to do with singing (thank goodness), but does build trust, charisma and rapport. (Hack #2)
Thread Theory: Want to be socially attractive? This little hack will change the way you interact so you never run out of things to say. (Hack #5)
Speed-Reading: Wish you could hone your intuition? Learn the science of speed-reading and be able to uncover personality traits of anyone from clients to dates to bosses. (Hack #7)
The Appreciation Matrix: We all know the power of acknowledgement, but how do we really use it? This science will blow your social mind. (Hack #8)
The Art of Storytelling: Always wish you could captivate a room? Tell a great story? There is a formula to the perfect story and it is easy to hack. (Hack #10)
The Science of Popularity: What really makes someone popular? How can you leverage what science has uncovered about popularity. (Hack #14)
The 7 Microexpressions: Learn how to decode the 7 universal facial expressions and how they can be used to predict people’s emotions. (Hack #6)

Join the Science of People Monthly Insights for more human behavior hacks:Let me explain a people puzzle that has always perplexed me:
It’s ok to date.
It’s ok to define a romantic relationship.
It’s ok to re-evaluate a partnership.
It’s ok to breakup.
It’s hard in romantic relationships, but it is ok—if not essential to be able to date around and then break-up when it doesn’t work out.
Why is this not ok with friendships?
Why can’t I date friends?
Why do I feel so bad wanting to re-evaluate friendships?
Why do I feel silly trying to label some friends as ‘best’ friends?
Why do I feel so, so, so bad breaking up with friends?
In romantic relationships we have break-ups all the time—it is considered an important part of finding the right partner. But could you imagine saying to a new friend:
“Um yeah. It’s been great seeing each other. But I just don’t think we are meant to be. I want to friend break-up. It’s not you, it’s me.”
No way. I can’t imagine it.
But here’s the thing: Sometimes we have to break-up with friends. End it with frenemies. Stomp out toxic relationships. See if you have one of these before moving on:
Do you have a frenemy?
Do you have an obligatory friend?
Do you have a toxic person in your life?
This is one of the hardest posts I have EVER written. Partially because it is personal to me…
I have been broken up with by a best friend and it broke my heart.
I recently had to break up with a friend and it felt like death.
It is very rarely talked about.
Ok, so here I am going to try to make the best of this bad situation. Here’s how you know you need to break up with a friend…
How to Know If You Need a Break Up:
There are warning signs that a friendship needs to end. Here they are:
You dread seeing them
You feel they undermine you more than support you
There is deception in the relationship—they lie to you
There is self-deception in the relationship—one of you is lying to yourself
You have grown apart and the relationship is dragging on like a slowly dying animal
Any of these feel familiar? Keep reading.
Option #1: The Talk
You know how in romantic relationships you have “The Talk?” That talk is the pinnacle of nerves, awkwardness and sometimes resolution. The Talk usually has a number of goals:
To clarify boundaries
To define a relationship
To see where each person stands
To talk about a future
Here’s the great thing about having “The Talk” with friends—it can initiate a break-up talk, it can prepare someone for an imminent break-up or it can resolve having to break-up at all.
You owe it to your friendship to put it all out on the table. The entire goal of the talk is to bring everything to the surface:
Hidden resentments
Miscommunications
Old fights
Jealousy
Misunderstandings
Boundaries
Recommendations:
I recommend doing this in person—do not initiate over text or chat! Everything is better, clearer and easier in person.
Go with a goal in mind—do you want to clear something up? Do you want to address something? What would your ideal outcome be?
Option #2: The Break
I think friendships sometimes need breaks. Especially if you just had a very difficult talk, you might need some time away. Breaks can serve to:
Give you a fresh perspective
Calm down
Miss each other
Re-evaluate
Here’s the nice thing about breaks–you can take them for whatever reason you are most comfortable with:
It’s Me: You can say that you are really busy and need time.
It’s You: If you feel hurt by your friend’s actions, if you feel there has been jealousy or undermining (see our articles on frenemies and ambivalent relationships). You can say you need time to recover.
It’s Us: Especially after a hard talk, you can tell a friend that you need some distance for both of you to re-evaluate.
Recommendations:
I do recommend adding a time component to your break. This will help if you have someone who is not good with boundaries. It will also give you time to re-evaluate without wondering if you should text or contact. Just like a romantic relationship, defined space can let you take a step back.
The terms of your break can be flexible or rigid. You can say, let’s talk again in 2 weeks. You can say, let’s see how we feel and check-in when we feel we are ready.
Option #3: The Slow Back Away
Let’s say you are in a one-sided friendship or you are friends with someone who is not good with boundaries. Then you might not be able to have the talk or an official break. In this way, you can try the slow back away.
You should use this if:
You worry that they will not accept a break
They will not be honest if you have The Talk
They are bad with boundaries
You hate confrontation
This method is less direct—so it’s not my favorite, BUT it can help gently end a relationship or avoid hurting someone’s feelings. The slow back away is usually done by just being ‘too busy’ and ‘ too hard to reach.’
I hate writing this, but the goal here is to have a gentle easing in the relationship. You want them to slowly get the message that you want a different kind of relationship. You don’t want to hurt their feelings. You want them to save face.
Recommendations:
Text instead of call
Engage less on social media
Take longer to respond to texts
Respond with shorter texts
Get together in less intimate settings
Get together for shorter, more casual occasions
Be too busy to get together
**Again, this is my least favorite because it feels the least honest. But sometimes it is the nicest way to break-up with someone.
Option #4: The Burst
There comes a point in some unhealthy, unfulfilling relationships where the friendship bubble needs bursting. The lies. The faking it. The pretending everything is fine. It needs to stop. I believe friendship breakups should be treated EXACTLY like a romantic break-up. Something like:
Hey, I know we have had trouble getting together over the last few months. I think that is mostly my fault. I have been pulling away. I think last year when X happened, it really hurt my feelings. I have not been able to get over it. I know you are a great person and have been a wonderful friend, but I think our relationship has changed. I do not think we can salvage it with so much that has gone on. I am sorry.
Recommendations:
State needs that are not being met
Be gentle and kind
Talk about how you feel
Don’t assign blame
Don’t make excuses
This is incredibly hard. I know it. But I think that if you feel you have to end a relationship, you have to clear the way.
When we say no to relationships that don’t serve us, we make room for relationships that do.
Live in truth,
Vanessa
Want more on the Science of friendship? Then you need to check out my book Captivate
Ever wonder what makes people tick
Do you have dreams of turning the skills and hobbies you are passionate about into a money-making side project or full-time business? Regardless of where you are in your current career, with enough hustling you can build a reputation where people know you for your passion, earn reliable side income, and transform your life so that you spend your time doing what you love.
This month we chose Crush It! By Gary Vaynerchuk as our Science of People book club book to learn from the strategies he used to go from working for his family’s small liquor store to being one of the most respected entrepreneurs in America.
Here are my favorite lessons from the book.
Your Passion is Worth the Pain
There’s no way to get around it, succeeding at something you are passionate about, especially if your passion lies outside of your day job, takes an immense amount of work.
In his book, Vaynerchuk emphasizes that success requires serious hustling. By hustling, he doesn’t mean putting in a few hours on the weekend. You have to work harder than everyone else competing against you to accomplish the same or similar goals and that means you have to be willing to do the late night, before work, and long weekend work sessions that will put you ahead.
If you are truly passionate about what you are pursuing, all of the long hours, sleep deprivation, and challenges will feel worthwhile because you get to live with the satisfaction of making progress toward your most fiery and personal goals.
Listen to Your DNA
When deciding what goals you want to pursue, Vaynerchuk says that the most important elements to consider is your DNA. We are all genetically wired to have certain skills and the key to success is to capitalize on the ones you have instead of trying build the ones you don’t. It’s important to do this even if you lack skills that are typically seen as necessary for success.
Here’s an example: Vaynerchuk is admittedly terrible at school. Growing up he never got good grades or even tried to succeed academically. Conventional advice says that formal education is the key to success but Vaynerchuk knew that it wasn’t for him. Instead of stressing himself out to get good grades, he accepted his poor GPA and focused his time and energy on the entrepreneurial pursuits like selling baseball cards and working for the family business. By living life according to his natural strengths, he was able to gain a practical education that enabled him to accomplish more as an entrepreneur than he would have been able to by pursuing a path to success that didn’t align with who he is.
This is not to say that you shouldn’t work on improving at things you struggle with, especially if those things are crucial to your success. However, you’re far more likely to succeed if you center your goals around activities that you are naturally good at.
Don’t Strive to Become the Person You Admire Most
We all hear people make statements like “I want to be the next Mark Zuckerberg” or “I hope I can have a career as great as [name of a successful friend/family member].”
While it’s essential to have people who you admire and learn from, Vaynerchuk argues that striving to have a career exactly like someone else’s is a self-sabotaging effort.
Highly successful people stand out because there is no one else quite like them. Instead of looking at successful people and trying to be just like them, figure out what strategies they used to become successful and use those to differentiate yourself with your unique goals.
Your Social Media Presence is Your Resume
We all know that what you post online matters because there is a chance that someone from HR will see it. However, it’s not just HR you should be thinking about seeing your profiles. The connections in your network are one of your most powerful sources of opportunities.
In The Tipping Point, Malcolm Gladwell writes that “The more acquaintances you have, the more powerful you are.” Unlike your close friends and colleagues, your acquaintances thrive in a different social universe than you do. The result is that they know about jobs and networking opportunities that no one else in your inner circle does. In fact, 83% of people who find their jobs through a current contact do so through people they see only occasionally, if at all.
Keeping your social media accounts up-to-date with content that fits your personal brand ensures that when opportunities come up in your network, you’ve already spent months, if not years, building a reputation that shows you would be a good fit.
Content is Your Currency
In today’s busy, often confusing, world, advice from a trusted friend is exactly what people need to help them get through their days. Vaynerchuk believes that well-written, practical, entertaining, or otherwise valuable content on both your social media accounts and by directly sending articles to particular individuals, is one of the most effective.
The key to creating awesome content is to choose the medium that best suits your personality and strengths. Here’s how:
If you have a vivacious personality and feel comfortable sharing your ideas verbally like Vaynerchuk, then share your ideas through live streams and posting videos.
If you love putting your thoughts into writing, write insightful posts and emails to help people learn from your experiences and research.
If you have an eye for photography or design, share beautiful visuals that reveal the way you see the world.
This doesn’t have to be a lonely effort either. Team up with a friend with similar goals and complementary skills to split the time and effort it takes to create captivating content.
If you’re not great at creating content yourself, don’t worry. You can still harness the currency of content by keeping up with the websites in your areas of interest and sharing the very best content with your readers. If you want to strengthen your relationship with a particular individual, pay attention to the struggles they are facing and send them high-quality content tailored to their needs.
