What is an Intrapreneur?
Do you fantasize about becoming an entrepreneur but love the company you’re working for and would hate to leave it? You don’t have to start your own business to have an entrepreneurial career. Instead, become an intrapreneur.

The term “intrapreneurship”  was first coined  by the business authors Gifford and Elizabeth Pinchot in the late 1970 to describe employees in large, highly structured corporations who defied the norm by acting creatively and autonomously despite the hierarchical environments they existed within.

Intrapreneurs are individuals who are dedicated to their companies but also have the  fiery passion and creativity  of  entrepreneurs. They desire to  bring revolutionary ideas to life  and yield higher returns for their companies, but want and usually obtain, the freedom to do so without passing through all of the processes that exist within large companies.

If this sounds you, you may be the perfect fit to become an intrapreneur.

How to Become an Intrapreneur
If you’re interested in becoming an intrapreneur, the first step is to look into your company’s policies regarding working on personal projects during work hours. Many innovation-driven companies allow their employees to spend a certain percentage of their time on projects of their choosing and if that’s the case for you, you know that you have time available at work to come up with your intrapreneurship idea. Managers at companies with a personal project policy also tend to like to hear about how you’re spending that time, so it’s easy to start a conversation about  your intrapreneurial ideas.

Companies like Shutterstock hold annual hackathons where, for a short period of time, they give their employees unlimited freedom to experiment with any ideas they are interested in and  pitch them to management.  If company leaders like the idea, they will officially pursue the project and give the intrapreneur the freedom and resources to bring their idea to life.

While becoming an intrapreneur is easiest in companies that have policies in place that support intrapreneurship, you can still become an intrapreneur if it is something the company you work for is not accustomed to allowing. The key is to identify a problem or potential area of improvement within your company and  create an innovative solution  for it. You may only have one chance to convince your superiors to adopt it so, like an entrepreneur pitching to a venture capitalist, you need to thoroughly do your research and be prepared to prove your idea will yield a return on your company’s investment before you  pitch it to decision-makers.  
